---
title: Jack London and the Phenomenology of Species
geometry: margin=1in
bibliography: bibliography.bib
---

<!--useful phrase, maybe something in the title: the phenomenology of
species-->

> You must not deny your relatives, the other animals. Their history is your
history.

> ---Jack London, "The Other Animals"

> History is the true natural history of man.

> ---Karl Marx, *The Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844*

> Even if we were to emotionally identify with a word like mankind, we would
not know what being a species is, for, in species history, humans are only an
instance of the concept species as indeed would be any other life form. But one
never experiences being a concept.

> ---Dipesh Chakrabarty, "The Climate of History: Four Theses"

### Introduction

<!-- if possible it would be cool to use the intro to explore Before Adam in
toto... as well as introducing the anthropos/universals debate and previewing
species-being-->

> For my fear is the fear of long ago, the fear that was rampant in the Younger
World, and in the youth of the Younger World. In short, the fear that reigned
supreme in that period known as the Mid-Pleistocene. (1) [longer quote w more
context?]

Jack London's *Before Adam* (year) begins with an act of geological
periodization. But the object of this periodization is not a stratigraphic
record, the layers of mineral sedimentation that make up the inorganic archive
of the planet. The archive here is the periodizing consciousness itself, having
gained access to the accreted layers of memory that make up its identity---an
identity that in turn encompasses far more than a sum of individual
experiences. 

... [novel summary]

Jack London's geology, in short, is a geology of the human, a geology in which
the human is both the subject and object of study. A century later, we have
a name for this geology: the Anthropocene. <!--room for mini arg-statmeent
here?--> [explores the intersection of geology (?), the species, and the
individual consciousness in London] 

...This chapter will explore the ways in which literary naturalism, and
particularly the works of Jack London, has already taken up one of the chief
heuristic challenges posed by the Anthropocene as a theoretical discourse: to
consider the place of natural history in human history by conceiving of the
human *as a species*. 

Of course, though technically only designating a geological epoch defined by
the influence of collective human activity, the term "Anthropocene" has always
indicated much more than a geological consideration of the human. Even in some
of the earliest uses of the term, it had already come to indicate anthropogenic
destruction of the planet through means as diverse as carbon emissions,
deforestation, population growth, and animal domestication
[@crutzen_geology_2002, @crutzen_"anthropocene"_2006]. Considering the "human
species" as a universalizing concept is both an explanation of this destruction
and a response to it. According to Dipesh Chakrabarty, in his seminal essay
"The Climate of History: Four Theses," "Species may indeed be the name of
a placeholder for an emergent, new universal history of humans that flashes up
in the moment of the danger that is climate change" [-@chakrabarty_climate_2009
221]. If our "moment of danger" is causing us to reach for the "species"
concept, causing us to seek a biological collective that exceeds and comprises
the individual, it is in response to a dual relationship to mass extinction. We
recognize on one hand that the human collective has become a destructive force
by its very nature, exceeding the capacities usually known to biology. But we
recognize at the same time that this destructiveness does not come with
omnipotence. To think of the human in a superhuman timescale is to take
seriously the threat of self-inflicted mass extinction, to place ourselves in
the long history of lifeforms coming into being and disappearing in
a geological moment.

And yet, though the species is a universal concept that "flashes up" in an
existentially threatening moment, it inhabits a timescale too far removed from
that of human experience to be easily apprehensible---or, for that matter,
apprehensible at all. As Chakrabarty has it: 

> Who is the we? We humans never experience ourselves as a species. We can only
intellectually comprehend or infer the existence of the human species but never
experience it as such. There could be no phenomenology of us as a species. Even
if we were to emotionally identify with a word like mankind, we would not know
what being a species is, for, in species history, humans are only an instance
of the concept species as indeed would be any other life form. But one never
experiences being a concept. (220)

We may be able to conceive of the totality, and we may be able to experience it
as a kind of guilt. But the phenomenological gap between the self and the
species is too large: species may always be already embodied, but it is never
experienced as such. The Anthropocene then presents a moment of distinct crisis
in the individual imagination. Thinking our new epoch requires that the
individual experience be expanded even further beyond the self than what normal
historical consciousness requires, a collectivity that is less an
identification with something larger than an interrogation of an embodied
identity, a recognition of the collective that is stitched into the fabric of
each individual. 

Herein, of course, lies the great danger of species-thinking as a theoretical
program. It risks ignoring a half-century of critical theory, the very basis of
which is opposition to the kind of essentialism a discourse of the human
species would seem to imply. Ian Baucom, considering Chakrabarty's universal
species concept, points out that "it seems to wreak havoc on the key principles
of historical understanding and political commitment that have animated not
only Chakrabarty’s preceding body of work, but the broader project of
postcolonial critique to which that work has been dedicated"
[-@baucom_human_2012 3]. To consider the species concept as a universal of the
same type as those that postcolonial critique has opposed in the past, however,
would be to miss Chakrabarty's point. It is not a universalism in the Hegelian
mode, which Chakrabarty himself has opposed in the name of a struggle for the
"freedom of difference," but a "natural--scientific" universalism that presents
a new paradigm entirely[@-baucom_human_2012 3]. As Baucom reads it, in this new
paradigm "freedom can no longer be conceived of as the freedom of difference
against the power of the globalizing same." Rather, because "freedom" now
relies on survival through a collective effort to save the planet by
transforming our relationship to it, this universal concept has become a *sine
qua non* of freedom itself. The pursuit of freedom is now "a task of the
species, as species, for the species. It is a universal human challenge,
a challenge of humanity’s shared natural history and its shared planetary
future" [-@baucom_human_2012 3]. 

The problem of species, of the "*anthropos*" in the Anthropocene, is thus
manifold and entangled. It demands a natural-scientific universalism that takes
the species concept as the basis for human history and as the starting point in
the struggle for freedom. It requires an understanding of anthropogenic
planetary change based on this species history. But in developing such
a species history, we risk backsliding into the essentialisms of the past, and
thus a concerted effort must be made to differentiate a natural-scientific
universalism of collective survival from the universals of the past that have
long been used to justify programs of domination and supremacy. 

And yet over all these tasks hovers an enduring paradox: to address the
conceptual and practical challenges of the Anthropocene, we must embrace
a concept that Chakrabarty claims fundamentally exceeds the capacities of human
experience, that has no phenomenology, that is somehow both embodied and
inaccessible.

Though differently framed, the defining questions and formal characteristics of
literary naturalism speak directly to this set of concerns. In pursuing the
well-trodden ground of the "determinism" question in literary naturalism,
critics of the genre have debated the role of species characteristics in
determining the actions and experiences of the
individual.[^ln-determinism-species-examples] The naturalist character is,
famously or notoriously, less notable as an individual subjectivity than as
a nexus of warring deterministic forces. The most marked conflicts occur
between "forces" defined by evolutionary conditioning and those that are
a product of a physical and social environment, especially in the context of
urban environments.[ Norris examples? ] Introducing the species concept into
this discourse merely requires a reminder that speciation is the product of
evolutionary variation.

[^ln-determinism-species-examples]: some examples of naturalist criticism that
drives this home? Look at the classics: Pizer, Walcutt... "Determined Fictions"

But when this common reading of the naturalist character is recast not just in
terms of the species concept, but in terms of the species concept with all the
resonances it has gained in the discourse of the Anthropocene, readings of the
naturalist form and its philosophical underpinnings alike gain added
significance. In treating characters as more than individual subjectivities, as
typological figures and as products of biological and environmental conditions,
the narrative strategies unique to naturalist fiction pursue the same
imaginative capacities that are required to conceive of the species as
a category of experience as well as an abstract scientific concept<!--too
convoluted, rewrite-->. It is through fear, a visceral and decidedly
unscientific experience, that the *Before Adam* protagonist accesses the
history of the species. To feel the fear of the Pleistocene epoch is to recall
a distinctly different humanity, one that has not superceded the bounds of
biological agency to become geological---indeed, one that has not yet removed
itself from the food chain or secured its sustenance through the soft conquest
of agriculture and animal domestication. To recall this earlier state of being
in the context of evolutionary history is to draw the outline of the human
species itself through a rare experiential link. The result is not an abstract
conception but a duality of being that encompasses a multi-epochal humanness. 

<!-- preview species-being here? -->

<!-- not sure whether to preview B.D. and V.M here or move these blurbs to the
section where I actually deal with them... [update: yeah probably move them to
the later section]-->

Experiencing humanness *per se*, and doing so on a scale that exceeds the
individual, has ramifications for London's environmental consciousness just as 
it does for environmental consciousness in the Anthropocene. Nowhere is this
more evident than in his agricultural novels, written in the final years of his
life as he worked his "Beauty Ranch," an experimental farm in the [Sonoma
Valley] that became a material staging ground for his budding ecological
consciousness. 

*Burning Daylight* (1910) can be read as narrating the development of such
a consciousness. Just as London's best-known writing begins with stories of dog
running and gold mining in the far north and concluded in agricultural
narratives, Elam "Burning Daylight" Harnish's story begins when he goes from
carrying mail in the Yukon [check task and place] to striking it rich on
fortuitous gold claims [I think it's more complex than this...]. His extractive
impulse leads him naturally into financial speculation and thus to the urban
centers of California, where he experiences the classic naturalist "plot of
decline" as distance from his wilderness roots takes its toll through the
drinking and inactivity it engenders. London paints a portrait of a typological
figure whose very physical being and essential character transforms as a result
of a change in his environment, and the loss is rendered in terms that are
understood historically as reflecting a change in the fundamental nature of the
species. The only way for Harnish to regain his physical vitality is to abandon
a capitalist conception of land in favor of a respectful engagement with it, an
engagement that is aesthetic at the same time that it is horticultural and
ecological. Rather than extracting value from land in the form of rent, Harnish
begins to value the land itself based on its health and an autonomy that
approximates that of the wild north from which he came. But it is not wildness
itself that he values---rather, it is his relationship with the land,
a relationship that is active without being extractive, encouraging growth that
increases the productive capacity of the land whether or not what is produced
is profitable. In order to attain this state of horticultural enlightenment, he
has to come to an understanding of the influence environment has on his basic
being, or in other words of the naturalist logic of determinism that cuts right
to the genre's conception of humanness itself. When a small landslide in his
new idealized natural environment reveals a strain of gold, he feels himself
momentarily pulled back into the extractive, urban version of the human that he
has fought hard to escape. In an important symbolic moment, he covers the gold
back up, knowingly choosing an atavistic human existence to preserve himself
and his immediate environment in the same act. A dynamic relationship to
species, one that balances determinism of possible futures with a free act of
choice among those futures, is the basis of this environmental praxis.

*The Valley of the Moon* (1913) is in many ways a reprise of the themes of
*Burning Daylight* that pushes even further both the atavistic relation to
species and the resultant environmental praxis. The novel is neatly divided
between sections dealing with the city and the country, setting up a neat test
case for the naturalist urban premise of the naturalist plot of decline. Billy
and Saxon effect a flight from the city of Oakland when teamster union strikes
are put down by zealous police violence---and because of Billy's surrender to
alcohol that is the partial result. The second half of the novel chronicles
their travels in search of a plot of land, which they idealize by imagining as
a "valley of the moon," otherworldly and perhaps unattainable. [check? where
does the valley of the moon thing begin?] On the way to finding this land,
a clear proxy for London's own "Beauty Ranch," Billy and Saxon gather
horticultural knowledge from a combination of farming operations owned and
managed by immigrant communities, market gardeners with upscale clientele, and
a set of books and pamphlets that represent a cross-section of London's own
Beauty Ranch horticultural library.[^ln-tichi] Putting this collected wisdom
into practice has an effect on Billy and Saxon similar to what Elam Harnish
experiences in *Burning Daylight*: they settle into a hard-working but
unalienated routine of agricultural labor and living, having escaped the
degrading influence of urbanity. Billy and Saxon's story follows a "back-to-the
land" motif that is built on the naturalist logic of determinism and decline
while complicating that logic at the same time. Conceding a degree of
environmental determinism, at least as far as the broad categories of rural and
urban environments, the pair nevertheless have a degree of choice in choosing
a new environment and in transforming the environment they find themselves
in---which transformation is possible to a much greater degree beyond the dense
and alienated environment of the city. 

[^ln-tichi]: citation in Tichi's book on London as reformer


For Billy and Saxon, choosing among possible environments and, by extension,
possible modes of being also entails choosing how to relate to their forebears.
They experience a more voluntary form of the atavism of *Before Adam*: where
*BA*'s protagonist unwittingly exceeds the boundaries of individual experience,
Billy and Saxon seek out a consciousness that exceeds themselves and the
timescale of the individual. They willfully change their environment and their
relation to it only after understanding themselves in terms of their forebears
and of broader historical action. In the first place, they understand their
exploration of California in search of land as an extension of their family
history several generations back. [quotes] But this broadening of the self goes
back even further, into a shared fantasy of a seafaring past through which they
understand their own nomadic existence. [quotes] 

Finally, these attempts to connect with personal family histories, real or
imagined, coincide with an understanding of the land itself not as it is, but
as a process resulting in its current state. Billy and Saxon (especially Saxon)
see the conventional wisdom of California farmers gone badly awry, represented
most succinctly by a farmer who brags about how many plots of land he has
single-handedly exhausted. They also see in the larger environmental history of
the country this same short-sightedness, an agricultural mode oriented to
building cities by stripping the countrysides with no thought given to
maintaining the soil. In other words, they discover that the same forces that
produced the environment from which they fled have also looted the Arcadia they
hoped to find. Their atavism gives them a counterpoint, a second comparative
perspective with which they can see the destruction wrought by too great
a degree of human influence on our environment. The wider view they gain
ultimately allows them to make a different choice. Rejecting the trend, they
begin systematically building the soil on first one farm, then several in the
Sonoma Valley. The novel concludes with Saxon becoming pregnant, something they
worried would not be possible after their travails in the city led to
a miscarriage. This ending establishes a clear symbolic link (albeit
a troubling one from an ecofeminist perspective) between their integration into
a larger narrative of heredity and species and the discovery of an alternative
to environmental destruction. 

And yet, in *The Valley of the Moon* and much of London's larger body of work,
the topic that stands out most clearly is not species, but race. Indeed, the
two concepts can be difficult to untangle in London's work, a fact that does
nothing to quell concerns that any discourse predicated on the species will
risk being inherently regressive. Billy and Saxon's attempts to understand
themselves in a larger timescale is often framed as a quest for a racially pure
identity. They initially bond over a shared "Anglo-Saxon" lineage and routinely
utter nativist commonplaces. As a result, criticism of *The Valley of the Moon*
has largely, if understandably, missed the environmentalist forest for the
racist trees. 

But there is good reason to question any reading of *The Valley of the Moon*
that takes these nativist sentiments at face value, treating them as either
stable throughout the novel or as expressions of an uncomplicated perspective
of London's own. Rather, in the scope of the entire novel, this nativism and
white supremecism must be understood as objects of critique. Despite her name,
Saxon becomes a proponent of what London sometimes called the "Brotherhood of
Man,"[^ln-brotherhood] resisting and mocking Billy's sense of racial
superiority. [an example or two] Though at the beginning of their journey they
search for contact with their personal mythology of an Anglo-Saxonism based on
a seafaring and homesteading past, by its end that narrative has failed them.
Though they still harbor a belief that their ancestry makes them
"zone-conquerors" destined to expand and take over whatever is on their
horizon, they come to realize that this "conquering" is really just
destruction. [quote about white people wrecking everything] Furthermore, Saxon
sees the inverse of this destructive impulse in the practices of the people
Billy sees as his inferiors. London's classic white superman becomes a figure
of ridicule, part of the very problem that London positions as a cause of the
growing environmental crisis. Resisting it requires renouncing this supremecism
and embracing a sort of pluralism instead, while still retaining a sense of
themselves in terms of a larger encompassing human identity. In *The Valley of
the Moon*, the supposedly determined characteristics of Anglo-Saxonism become
the root of all environmental evils, while the solution is to embrace the
cultural differences that define the human species. 

[^ln-brotherhood]: cite London's Racial Lives on this term and in support of
this argument in general


The rest of this chapter will... [ ]

### Species-Being, Human and Animal

<!--outline dog books, nature fakers, to build a fire; must conclude long intro
by opening up the question of species-being per se--->

The part of London's work that is most relevant to the species discussion is
also the part for which he is most famous: the stories with canine
protagonists. In *The Call of the Wild* (1903) and *White Fang* (1906), two
dogs explore the line between domesticity and wildness. In the former, Buck
becomes progressively wilder as he moves from a comfortable existence on a farm
to leading a sled team to running free with a pack of wolves. The latter
presents an inverse situation, tracing White Fang's life from his birth in the
wilderness through his coming of age in captivity, where he is forced into the
dog fighting ring until being rescued and finally domesticated. Here and
elsewhere, London uses the individual dog character to explore the subjective
experience of species. On one hand, he considers the degree to which the
experience of a single dog is the result of dogness---that is, to what extent
species itself can be said to account for individual subjectivity. On the other
hand, he uses the dog figure as a vantage point from which to consider the
human, and to ask whether humanness can be used to define the individual person
in the same way that dogness can define the individual dog. 

Even where his conclusions were limited to actual dogs, interrogating species
as such made trouble for London in what is now known as the "nature fakers"
controversy, pitting him against none other than the sitting president and
self-appointed authority on all things out-of-doors, Theodore Roosevelt. The
controversy began when a scientist named John Burroughs wrote an article called
"Real and Sham Natural History," in which he decried the appearance of
sympathetic and above all individualistic animal characters in the fiction of
the day. Burroughs claimed that all animal behavior was entirely instinctual,
and that the implications of reason and learned behavior in individual animals
on which these animal fictions relied constituted nature-fakery. To Burroughs,
the non-human animal is entirely mechanistic, an automaton driven by pure
instinct. [check in the actual essay---make sure this isn't an opportunistic
gloss by london] For his part, Roosevelt leveled petty complaints against
*White Fang*: he saw fakery in the claim that a lynx could kill a dog (which
does not happen in *White Fang*) and that a bull dog could beat a wolf dog in
a fight.[ditto] 

When these critiques began to appear, London did his best to keep out of it. As
he wrote several years later of the incident in an essay called "The Other
Animals": "when the word *nature-faker* was coined, I, for one, climbed into my
tree and stayed there...and a Honolulu reporter elicited the sentiment from me
that I thanked God I was not an authority on anything" [@london_other_???].
When he finally did climb down from his tree, he dismissed Roosevelt's claims
easily enough, describing the president as an "amateur" and saying he "does not
understand evolution, and he does not seem to have made much of an attempt to
understand evolution" [@london_other_???]. On this basis, he excused the
president's mistakes and suggested a more careful rereading of the works
Roosevelt critiqued.

In responding to Burroughs, London was more comprehensive and more damning, and
in being so reveals a continuity between his dog books and his meditations on
the human. In "The Other Animals," he recounts several experiences with his own
dogs that bear a clear relation to episodes in his fiction, analyzing them to
demonstrate reason triumphing over instinct. The drives of instinct and reason,
he says, come out of an evolutionary succession, with the former a "race-habit"
that "is blind, unreasoning, mechanical" and the latter a development that
culiminates in, but is not exlusive to, humanness itself. His concluding salvo
continues to place human and non-human on an evolutionary continuum, but in
doing so it also suggests that the process that leads to the human continues to
exist in the humans of the present:

> Mr. Burroughs, though you stand on the top of the ladder of life, you must
not kick out that ladder from under your feet. You must not deny your
relatives, the other animals. Their history is your history....What you
repudiate in them you repudiate in yourself — a pretty spectacle, truly, of an
exalted animal striving to disown the stuff of life out of which it is made,
striving by use of the very reason that was developed by evolution to deny the
processes of evolution that developed it. This may be good egotism, but it is
not good science.

Embrace the animal, London tells us (with Burroughs as a proxy), "exalted
animal" though it may be. Claiming that human action is driven exclusively by
reason gives the lie to the very utility of that reason, for reason
paradoxically requires an admission of unreason in the form of more atavistic
drives. Contrary to the straw-man versions of naturalist determinism that have
marked critiques of the genre for over a century, animalistic drives in the
human and non-human alike are non-mechanistic. Rather, London's naturalism
positions these drives as a substratum that exists in a complex mixture with
the reason that both derives from and seeks to disown it. The extent to which
reason has developed is a matter of species.

But buried in this conclusion is another telling statement that complicates the
traditional boundaries between human history and natural history---the very
boundary that Chakrabarty and Baucom say the Anthropocene itself complicates.
"You must not deny your relatives, the other animals," London tells us. He
continues: "*Their history is your history*" (emphasis mine). What appears
a statement of inter-species comaradery becomes much more when considered in
terms of London's larger project in relation to species. He uses the species
concept as a starting point for a narrative exploration of the natural history
of the human---a unique kind of historical fiction, we might say, a natural
history fiction.

*Before Adam* is undoubtedly such a fiction, an attempt to bring to life, to
bring to experience, the natural history of the human. It experiments not so
much with different temporalities as with juxtaposed modes of experience
appropriate to different forms of consciousness in the history of the species,
just as other naturalist historical novels (Dreiser's *The Financier*, for
example) create the experience of an economic and social moment in human
history. Here the human *per se* is the object of historical inquiry. But
London himself highlights the novel's limitations as a general model for
experiencing species as more than a concept. [ quote from BA about the narrator
being an abnormal example of something that exists in everyone ]. If the
narrator is an extreme example of something that exists in everyone, the novel
in which he appears still leaves us with the crucial questions largely
unanswered: What does it mean to *live* species rather than think, not as
a transcendent experience but as a quotidian one? What does it mean to
experience the species as a defining category contingent on a moment in natural
history, in the way that certain historically contingent identities can be
experienced?

---

If *Before Adam* fails to address these questions, it is perhaps because it
fails to fully root itself in the experiences of either of the two moments it
depicts, fully inhabiting the experience of neither the Pleistocene nor the
Holocene. It may model a natural-historical fiction, but this fiction has the
narrative requirements as other forms of historical fiction. If he makes the
pre-human experience of the Pleistocene more accessible to a modern
consciousness, it may paint a clearer sketch of the process of speciation and
human development, in the same way that Dreiser makes the economic crisis of
1871 [?] open to experience to form an argument about the crisis-prone nature
of capitalism and finance. But neither novel does anything to expand the
temporal scale of their narration, a expansion without which any robust
experience of species remains out of reach. 

In a short story from the same period, "To Build a Fire," London performs just
such an expansion, and he does so by interrogating the classic naturalist
tropes of atavism and instinct. But in doing so he also presents a version of
the human that exceeds the category of biological species---and through
contrast with a canine character like those of *The Call of the Wild* and
*White Fang*, shows just how much the species-concept needs to be revised to be
experienced on human terms. The story tests the ways the forms of knowledge
that came to conflict in the "nature fakers" controversy define the experience
of species in canine and human subjects alike. It also pursues an
anti-essentialist definition of humanness as plastic and historically
contingent---a definition that effectively blends the historical and
natural-historical modes.

What makes these meditations on the human stand out even more distinctly is the
fact that they only exist in the second, longer version of the story---the
version written after *The Call of the Wild*, *White Fang*, and *Before Adam*.
"To Build a Fire" was first published as a much shorter story in [ ] magazine
in 1902. Shortly afterward, in 1903, *The Call of the Wild* was published to
popular acclaim, and was shortly followed by *White Fang* in 1906. Only after
exploring the narrative challenges of species in canine characters did he write
*Before Adam*, which was serialized in 1906 and 1907, extending to human
characters the explorations of species that come more naturally in reference to
non-human figures. Finally, in 1908, something he had discovered in writing
these books prompted him to return to the events of "To Build a Fire" with
a much more nuanced view of the human and a much more ambitious sense of the
philosophical vision it implies.

The early story forms a clear foundation for the later, canonical version. Both
feature a man traveling alone in temperatures less than negative-sixty degrees
(contrary to the advice of more experienced travelers) whose foot becomes
soaked with water. In both, the man struggles to build a fire to dry himself
out and stay alive, fighting the absolute numbness of his extremities to light
birch bark with a book of matches. But there are differences in the key events
as well, inviting a comparative reading. In the earlier story, the man makes it
back to camp with scars and an education. In the latter, he dies, and his
canine companion (who does not appear in the former version) returns without
him to "the other food-providers and fire-providers."[@london_build_2001 271]

With these two changes to the events of the story come more significant
philosophical implications, particularly about how reason and technology have
come to define the very essence of the human. Reason and technology are not
restricted to humans in his vision, however, merely existing in different
proportions with respect to other forms of knowing. Broadly speaking, knowledge
as such forms a barrier between the individual organism and death, and the
novel lays out three forms of such knowledge: instinct, reason, and social
knowledge. 

London is inconsistent regarding the extent to which each of these forms of
knowledge does indeed constitute knowledge. On one hand, instinct is presented
as something other than knowing. When, confronted with wet feet just as the man
is, the dog begins licking and biting its toes to break off the ice, London
draws a line between apparently automatic action and reason. The dog's
preventative measure "was a matter of instinct. To permit the ice to remain
would mean sore feet. It did not know this. It merely obeyed the mysterious
prompting that arose from the deep crypts of its being." In contrast, when the
man helps the dog remove the ice from its feet, he does so not out of some
coevolutionary impulse, but out of a deduced and self-serving rationale. No,
the dog did not know what the ice "meant": "But the man knew, having achieved
a judgment on the subject, and he removed the mitten from his right hand and
helped tear out the ice-particles."[@london_build_2001 263-4] Here is an
apparently familiar story about the line separating human and animal, not
unlike Burroughs's position in his excoriation of nature fakers. Where the man
"achieve[s] a judgment," the dog merely "obeys" a distinctly embodied
sedimentation of ancestral experiences. Dubbing the source of the dog's
instinctual response "the deep crypts of its being," London makes this action dead,
a stark contrast to the active language of the man's intellectual achievements.

But this familiar argument that places the non-human on the side of instinct
and the human on the side of reason is not London's argument, as is clear from
his response to Burroughs, and the easy division is quickly complicated. In the
first place, the dog of "To Build a Fire" has all the same capacity for reason
that London saw in his own dogs and that he ascribes to Buck and White Fang.
Responding to life-threatening cold, the dog has a learned response that
appears simultaneously with his instinctive one: "The dog had learned fire, and
it wanted fire, or else to burrow under the snow and cuddle its warmth away
from the air."[@london_build_2001 262] The dog prefers the fire it has learned
to depend on, but failing that, it has a reservoir of instinct to fall back on.
The man is not so lucky. Though he singularly fails to benefit from any
instinctive knowledge, however, it is not because of a lack in the instinctual
capacities of humanity as a species---as is clear in *Before Adam*, London
ascribes the same "deep crypts of being" to humans in varying degrees. It is
instead a matter of the man's particular ancestry: "This man did .not know cold.
Possibly all the generations of his ancestry had been ignorant of cold, of real
cold, of cold one hundred and seven degrees below freezing-point. But the dog
knew; all its ancestry knew, and it had inherited the knowledge."[... 264] We
understand by implication that things might be different for the man---*this*
man, not "man"---had his ancestors been more acquainted with the kind of cold
he confronts in the story. Furthermore, instinct is not a mysterious prompting
in this example, but a legitimate source of knowledge. The dog "knew", the man
"did not know" because of a difference in their access to instinctual
archives. 

<!-- I note at this point that the question of knowledge/forms thereof as
defining characteristics has become important... this sort of jives with what
I'm seeing in animal studies, Haraway and Wolfe, etc. Need to make this more
explicit sooner in the section-->Finally, both the human and non-human subjects
here have social relations that act as yet another source of knowledge. London
again and again observes, in both versions of the story, that the man has not
appreciated the advice of the "old-timer on Sulpher Creek" who warned him
against traveling alone, especially in temperatures below negative-fifty
degrees.[... 265] This, ultimately, is the man's cardinal sin, a lack of
respect for the accumulated knowledge of those who know the extreme environment
better than he does. For just as the individual alone in an extreme
environment is more fragile than in a group, the knowledge of the individual
is more fragile than collective knowledge: subject to gaps due to a lack of
both experience and so-called instinctual impulses as well as to simple
forgetfulness. Indeed, the man's demise could well stem from having "forgotten
to build a fire and thaw out" before sitting down to eat, which it is implied
would not have occurred had he travelled with companions or taken more heed of
advice.[... 264] 

What is more surprising is that his relationship with the dog could have
provided this social reservoir of knowledge were that relationship more
mutually supportive. The dog's instinctual reserves of wisdom are open to the
man, making (in theory if not in this case) inter-species sociality a route to
a replacement for those instinctual reserves that humanity lacks. Immediately
after drawing a sharp contrast between the man's lack of instinctual
understanding of the cold and the dog's awareness that "it was the time to lie
snug in a hole in the snow", London momentarily enters the dog's consciousness
to demonstrate an intentional withholding of what it knows: "there was no keen
intimacy between the dog and the man. The one was the toil-slave of the other,
and the only caresses it had ever received were the caresses of the whip-lash
and of harsh and menacing throat-sounds that threatened the whip-lash. So the
dog made no effort to communicate its apprehension to the man."[... 265] Cruel
treatment and exploitation are poor substitutes for social relationships, so no
transfer of information occurs. But the idea that instinct is communicable is,
in considering the species, remarkable---because we presume that instinctual
knowledge is either a shared *human* instinct (and does not need to be
communicated) or is inaccessible because it belongs to another species and is,
*ipso facto*, unable to communicated. London not only imagines a social life
that goes beyond the species, but suggests that such a social life is an
absolute necessity in certain environments.

The combination of the necessity of instinctual knowledge, the human's lack of
it, and the inter-species sociality as a replacement for it has a startling
implication in considering the fitness of humanity for survival. On its own,
the human is incomplete, just as "the man" as an individual is incomplete on
his own in the Yukon. He needs either the living sociality of advice and
companions, discourse with the dead in the form of a speaking archive of
instinctual knowledge, or the inter-species relationships that are enabled by
domestication (or symbiosis in the case of other species). 

To briefly summarize before moving on, then, London draws the species line
according to the availability of different types of knowledge, but he is not
absolutist in the way that Burroughs is or others are who claim that reason or
socialization uniquely define the human. Rather, London posits that the
characters of human and non-human species alike are defined by unique
combinations of these types of knowledge (to say nothing of the sensory) and
the ways in which they are determinative or not of action. 

---

Narratively rendering a comparative definition of species, however, is not the
same as narrating an *experience* of species as such as an identity. "The man"
never comes to an epiphanic understanding of himself as a member of the
species, but juxtaposition with the dog becomes the narrative mechanism by
which experiences that define the human species are identified as such.
In laying out a knowledge-based theory of species, London creates his concept
of humanness; but in narrating these moments in the context of that conceptual
framework, London pursues the phenomenology of species itself.

Indeed, the first glimmer of species-thinking in the story is a rejection of
the conceptual, but the rejection itself is a telling one: in the absence of
meditation on species, there is a more direct access to the behaviors that
define London's concept of the human. Confronted with temperatures more than
fifty degrees below zero, the man is entirely unreflective:

> The trouble with him was that he was without imagination. He was quick and
alert in the things of life, but only in the things, and not in the
significances. Fifty degrees below zero meant eighty-odd degrees of frost. Such
fact impressed him as being cold and uncomfortable, and that was all. It did
not lead him to meditate upon his frailty as a creature of temperature, and
upon man's frailty in general, able only to live within certain narrow limits
of heat and cold; and from there on it did not lead him to the conjectural
field of immortality and man's place in the universe. [... 261]

What defines the man and his narrative function in the story is also the very
"trouble with him". Here London establishes the man purely as a nexus of
experience and sensation, devoid of theorization or even imagination. In the
same stroke, the narrator assigns duty of both to the reader. The scornful
negatives, the litany of all the things the man *did not* do, act as
a challenge and establish the lens through which we are to understand the
sensory data and impressions conveyed by the rest of the narrative. The human
is also removed from a place of mastery over nature, and even from a position
of uniqueness among animals, becoming a "creature of temperature"---mere
organism, contingent on certain material conditions to arise and persist. What
the man expresses as cold and discomfort we are now primed to understand as
a specimen straying outside the narrow window of habitability appropriate to
its species. And yet it still sets up a narrative emphasis on the
phenomenological, the negative statements working to establish a frame of
reference while simultaneously refusing to foreground the material out of which
that frame is composed.

The title of the story, "To Build a Fire," takes on a new significance with
this "frailty" of the species in mind, as well as the insistent centrality of
temperature in the story as a whole and this definition of the human as
a "creature of temperature" in particular. The fire serves double-duty as
a dramatic conceit and the basic Promethean symbol, encapsulating the human's
reliance on technology for survival by asking us to consider the vulnerability
that reliance creates. But when the human is defined by the slim envelope of
temperatures that can support our existence, the fire comes to bear existential
weight on the level of the species. The phrase "to build a fire," an insistent
repetition throughout the story, is a statement of humanness itself in
a distinctly material sense. 

London's definition of the human by fire is one that is shared by current
scientists. The primatologist Richard Wrangham, for example, argues in
*Catching Fire: How Cooking Made Us Human* that cooking increased the amount of
energy obtained from food, the effects of which not only aided in the survival
of the species, but spurred the development of humanity itself. The
energy-hungry, inefficient digestive systems of humanity's predecessors gave
way to smaller digestive systems adapted to a more efficient cooked diet, as
well as a number of other physical adaptations like weaker jaws;[@wrangham
38-41] this change in the relative costs and gains in energy in turn is thought
to have spurred brain growth in turn.[@wrangham 105-6] Nor were these
adaptations limited to the human as a bounded biological agent. As their
"bodies responded by biologically adapting to cooked food" and the species, now
more resilient, spread across the planet, there were attendant ripples in the
area of the human's effects: "changes in anatomy, physiology, ecology, life
history, psychology, and society"---and, we must now add in light of the
Anthropocene, in geology. For London and Wrangham both, the development of the
human as we know it relied on the ability to exceed the boundaries of the self,
encompassing the things we use to define ourselves. "The man's" fire is thus as
defining as the wolf's coat.

<!--appendages, tobacco beard, birch, etc.-->

<!-- interesting note from Wrangham on Darwin:

He cited his fellow evolutionist Alfred Russel Wallace approvingly: “man is
enabled through his mental faculties ‘to keep with an unchanged body in harmony
with the changing universe.’” The control of fire was just another way for an
unchanged body with an adept mental faculty to respond to a natural challenge.
“When he migrates into a colder climate he uses clothes, builds sheds, and
makes fires; and, by the aid of fire, cooks food otherwise indigestible
. . . the lower animals, on the other hand, must have their bodily structure
modified in order to survive under greatly changed conditions.” (21)

-->

<!-- technology and prosthesis stuff -->

<!-- cyborgization leads somehow to loss of contact with the earth---a symbolic
register that corresponds to the very material loss of instinct/nature-ness in
the human-->

<!-- opening-out question: but wtf, how can species be so contingent?
(species-being in the Marxian sense helps make sense of it)-->


---


<!-- section: Marx: s-b is contingent while being universal; historical change
is a change in essence; talking about species is not the same as talking
about static unchanging essentialism; we can have both "their history is your
history" and "history is the true natural history of man"-->

