---
---

## Chapter One (London) informal abstract

Broadly speaking, I am investigating the ways species, race, and horticultural
systems collide in Jack London's agricultural novels, especially *The Valley of
the Moon* (1913), and how these coinciding themes prefigure the difficulties of
using the human *species* as a heuristic in the Anthropocene. In *The Valley of
the Moon*, Billy and Saxon flee the city of Oakland and "return to the land" in
an attempt to experience a fundamental humanness---a search that is complicated
and at times supplanted by contradictory perspectives on race. At first, London
seems to present a form of white supremacism, as his protagonists revel in
a shared "Anglo-Saxon" lineage through which they understand their own
experiences and desires. But later, they represent this lineage of conquest and
exploitation as the very thing that has stripped the American landscape of its
vitality and created the separation of town and country that they experience as
a loss of humanity. In order to experience their humanness, they must resist
the same racialized identity through which they previously understood
themselves and learn from the superior human ecology they see in practice on
the immigrant-owned farms of California. Conceiving of possibilities in the
human-nature relationship thus becomes a site of conflict for the very concept
of the human as species in London's eyes, just as it has a century later in
discussions of the Anthropocene.

As the proliferation of alternatives to the term "Anthropocene" demonstrates,
the "Anthropo-" prefix has been as contested in the humanities as the "-cene"
suffix has been in the sciences. "Anthropo-" seems to assign equal culpability
and equal risk to all humans, regardless of how one has benefited from the
fossil fuel economy or how imminently one is endangered by its climatic
outcomes. At the same time, understanding the effects of human activity
geologically seems to require a universalization of humanity, an act that
exceeds the bounds of human experience and the scope of human histories to
date. As Dipesh Chakrabarty puts it, "Species may indeed be the name of
a placeholder for an emergent, new universal history of humans that flashes up
in the moment of the danger that is climate change. But we can never
*understand* this universal. [... C]limate change poses for us a question of
a human collectivity, an us, pointing to a figure of the universal that escapes
our capacity to experience the world" (221-2). London's work is marked by
repeated attempts to narratively access the very experience of species that
Chakrabarty points out is unattainable, whether through animal characters in
his most famous works or through the "Mid-Pleistocene," pre-human primates of
*Before Adam* (1907). Reading London's work for this struggle with the
problematic heuristic of "species experience" can thus lend insight to
contemporary attempts to reconceive of human histories on a geological scale. 

Posing this question in the context of the rest of London's work can also bring
his less-read agricultural novels more closely into the ambit of the rest of
his work, influencing our readings of both as a result. Indeed, these late
agricultural novels can be seen as a new ground on which to explore themes that
defined his life and work more broadly. At the end of his life, Jack London's
dual obsession with species and race was joined by a third obsession, "natural"
living and farming techniques. Living and working on an experimental farm in
the Sonoma Valley, London's writing began to expound the theories on which his
agricultural practice was based, outlining industrial agriculture's
despoliation of the land in contrast to methods that develop the soil's
richness rather than stripping it of its resources. In the background of these
material and literary explorations are contemporaneous works such as Bolton
Hall's *Three Acres and Liberty*, a touchstone of the "back to the land"
movement, and F. H. King's *Farmers of Forty Centuries*, a study of "permanent
agriculture" methods in East Asian nations, that appear to have unified his
thinking about agriculture with his thinking on the human species and
evolutionary theory. Rather than being seen as a departure from his better
known animal novels and travel narratives, this ecological turn in London's
work should be understood as an extension of his long-standing attempts to
account for what Marx would call the human "species-being," or the defining
behavior of a species, and to navigate the contradictory views on race that
define much of his fiction. 


## Before Adam (notes)

*Before Adam* is Jack London's attempt to narrate the species as a meaningful
category---what Chakrabarty points out is today impossible. London's method for
doing so is through an act of speculation. The narrator is a modern man who
experiences through dreams the life of a forebear who is explicitly from
another geological period, the "Mid-Pleistocene". This modern narrator dubs his
forebear "Big-Tooth", and the split perspective that ensues, in which one
figure relates the experiences of another who is essentially absent, allows
these experiences to be put to language in a way that Big-Tooth himself was
unable to, as he and his species ("The Folk") were pre-verbal. London
eventually reveals that Big-Foot was the sole member of The Folk to contribute
to what would eventually become the human species, as the mother of his
children is an estranged member of the "Fire People," the sub-species that
London implies will eventually become human. We understand that even in his own
time, then, Big-Tooth is "an atavism"---a creature somehow out of time, or on
the waning edge of an evolutionary movement---just as we see the beings that
will replace him. We are asked, narratively, to identify with both, for we
share the atavist's narrative perspective while we are told that we are more
closely related to his antagonists. The act of identification London asks us to
make, then, is not identical to that performed by the modern narrator. It is
rather an identification *with process*, an experience of the self that is
premised not on individuals (though individual subjectivities are central to
the narrative effect), but on the positive and negative evolutionary pressures
that have formed the human of the Holocene---and as we now know, of the
Anthropocene.

## Valley of the Moon (notes)

VM is finally a critique of Americanism and its attendant social ecologies---we
might even say racial ecologies, for the final conclusion of the novel on the
intersection of race and ecology is that the Anglo-Saxon "zone conqueror"
frontier myth is the very thing that leads to bonanza farming and strip-mining
of the soil. It is not an Anthropocene but an Anglo-Saxoncene; while Billy
remains deterministically trapped by the desire to expand ever bigger, we
see over and over that Billy and Saxon's dreams are only realized when he
resists those impulses and listens to Saxon's wiser, more ecological,
place-based version of agriculture that she only learns by embracing the
methods and individuals of other cultures, overwriting the very impulses that
they see as defining their Anglo-Saxon identities. The ecological crisis in
miniature, the stripped and abandoned farms of the Sonoma Valley, can only be
resolved by an embrace of a multi-cultural social ecology and a renunciation of
nativism and Billy's working-class racism. (some of this backed up by
Reesman---cite copiously but claim what's my own)

## The Acorn-Planter (play, 1916)

Hard to know whether this is useful/how/how it fits into the whole larger
race/agrarianism thing. Depicts Native Americans as the aggressors, which is
disgusting, but not because of any innate primitivism---rather because of
a political structure in which the war-mongers among them are allowed too much
power. Depicts a "prophecy" of the coming of the "Sun Men" who are
blond-haired, blue-eyed, semi-mythical beings who carry thunder and from whom
verdancy springs naturally... and of course these beings are just white people.
Most alarmingly, co-opts the ham-fisted idea of American Indian mythology as
a justification of white conquest. (Reading this makes me want to stop working
on London, but that's obviously not an option. But I should probably address
this as a way of foregrounding the purpose of my reading, which is to confront
London's racism (and forwarding of racist ideologies) as a way of addressing
the racism implicit in certain kinds of species-talk). 

Here's the silver lining: the play concludes with an imagined alliance, what he
elsewhere calls a "brotherhood of man," between the "planters" among white
settlers and American Indian nations---the idea is that ideological commitments
and a shared agrarian vision would supercede the (totally imaginary rendering
of) racial divisions. Sort of coincides with the multicultural agrarianism that
concludes VM, but also problematizes it---maybe helps me navigate the
particular set of contradictions in that conclusion.




## Engagements with species and the anthropocene

### One Species, Same Difference? 

Chakrabarty skips poco eco 

Reminder: Chakrabarty: universal "more like a universal that arises from
a shared sense of catastrophe" and "cannot subsume particularities". I note
that London is at his most species-oriented when there is a catastrophe at
hand, be it environmen- tal catastrophe or the extinction of The Folk. 

"Post-colonial ecocriticism has already covered this terrain, acknowledging
the importance of environmental species thinking, even as it reminds us to
treat  such  calls  for  collectivity  with  due  caution." (33)

calls out ch as anthropocentric 

Chakrabarty's version of the species is premised on a shared attempt to become
less vulnerable.

The main claim here, and the topic of the author's critique, seems to be that
species-thinking is defined by a shared commitment to longevity and
reproduction, individually and as a species, in ways that seem to prescribe
this version of the species and of commonality while simultaneously
proscribing any such thinking on behalf of other species. 

Prescribes as a task for poco: interrogate the limits of species thinking while
still dwelling at the intersection of natural science and humanities

### Baucom, Human Shore

"Chakrabarty’s point is not that we should, therefore, abandon the project of
human freedom in the interest of averting a full-blown ecological catastrophe.
It is instead that within the moment of the Anthropocene we need to reconceive
freedom as, also, a struggle to preserve the life of the species and the
conditions under which human life and all other forms of life can flourish on
the planet." (2)

To that end, let me note two key things about this new humanism. The first is
that while it may constitute a universalism, it does not imply an essential-
ism. It is, instead, an epistemologically blended (or hybrid) universalism, one
which takes an empirical concept from the natural sciences (species,
plasticity) and grafts it with a philosophical concept from the humanities
(freedom), to produce what Hoegh-Guldberg and Bruno call a “novel as-
semblage”: a novel concept of the human (as species-toward-freedom,
plasticity-toward-freedom) part indebted to natural history and part to
reflective history; or as Malabou very precisely puts it, one that assembles
a concept of the human from a “reasonable materialism,” from a hybrid of the
reasoning sciences (philosophy, the humanities) and the natural sciences of
observation and description (biology, ecology, geology). 21 As such a hybrid
blend, or “novel assemblage,” this “human” is neither essential nor fixed. It
is open matter for a project of political thought.

And, as Chakrabarty’s essay indicates, it is one more thing: a univer-
sal that neither precedes reflection nor a political orientation toward the
future, but one that “arises from a shared sense of catastrophe.” 22 It is an
“emergent, new universal” that “flashes up in the moment of the danger
that is climate change.” 23 If that general formulation indicates that species
thinking ultimately emerges from the need to craft a strategic universalism,
then Chakrabarty’s precise phrasing, his appeal to a concept “flash[ing] up
in a moment of danger,” indicates that the human of this new, alterglobal
humanism (this human of the “concert of the faculties”) is also a specifically
Benjaminian universal, and that this concept of species (or, what we might
more productively think of as “species–being”), may well be regarded as an
analog to what Walter Benjamin calls “jetztzeit,” or “now-being.” (10)

The analogous concept of species–being, I am suggesting, invites us to assert
for the humanities, for postcolonial studies, both a similar and a new
constellating power, one whose key challenge is both to bridge the gap between
what-has-been and what-is and to span the divide between a philosophical and
a natural–scientific conception of the human. (10)

- Yes, and this is a way of framing the anachronistic method that characterizes
my study... use this in the intro, perhaps also in the use of species-being as
a concept

Taken together, Benjamin’s last and Chakrabarty’s four new theses thus invite
us to raise our angle of philosophi- cal and historical inspection to an
entirely different level: to view the scale of the challenge before us from
a second disastrous position in which the angel of history, wings blown
backwards into the heavens, might now find himself, an empyrean realm that has
itself not escaped the crisis of climate change, a heavenly height also subject
to humanity’s capacity to become a devastating, atmospheric, force of nature,
and so to see, from those pol- luted heights, both the catastrophes of recorded
history and the twinned, linked, catastrophes of natural history affecting the
earth’s continents and coastlines. (11)

- oh hai, a *raison* for my entire project, summarily put: 

"If it is to be more than a view from on high, however, it must be more than
that, or, perhaps more accurately, less than that; it must be less distanced,
less empyrean, and less stratospheric. It must abandon the heavens, set feet
back on the ground, and ask, whether, having caught that catastrophic glimpse
from above, we might, as Benjamin also hoped, “blast open the continuum of
history” that has produced this unfolding chain of catastrophes, so that we
might, in Malabou’s terms, render our work truly “plastique,” truly explosive
for the future. 27 If we are to do so, then, I firmly believe, we must return
to our archive, to seek and discover in it (in addition to the concept of
freedom) the further conceptual material that will allow our studies, our
interpretive strategies, and our habits of critique to acquire a new planetary
potentiality, to indeed become a force of nature."

"Rather, in extending the time frame of our self-understanding, in inviting us
to take on the deep historical recognition of our species–being, this form of
thinking and inhabiting the precariousness of life demands, as both Butler and
Chakrabarty have it, that we radically expand our commitment to enhancing the
conditions under which human life might flourish. It demands, as Chakrabarty
more particularly stresses, that we expand our commitment to the conditions
under which not just human life, but life itself, can continue to thrive
through the deep future of the planet. The paradox of that demand, of course,
is that the only way in which we might do so, the only way in which we might
help secure humanity’s capacity to persevere (in its species–being and as one
species among others) deep in time is by abandoning the Hobbesian/ Grotian
political law of self-preservation; by turning ourselves away from the
self-protective love of humanity for itself; by risking the insecurity of life
outside the confines of the classic commonwealth." (18)

## Critical London sources

### Earl on London's evolving agrarian vision

- mine literally every one of these quotes

" "In the solution of the great economic prob- lems of the present age," he
said, "I see a return to the soil. I go into farming because my philosophy and
research have taught me to recog- nize the fact that a return to the soil is
the basis of economics ... I see my farm in terms of the world, and I see the
world in terms of my farm." (qtd. in 99)

"What he envisioned was a universal conversion of swords into plowshares - or,
perhaps more accurately, of military tanks into tractors" (101)
 

### Gair on Citizenship, Capitalism, and Race in VM

"In *TVotM*, then, the journey undertakne by the two protagonists can be viewed
as a way of coming to terms with a history largely denied in the conclusion to
*BD*"---this history includes the displacement of native Americans and, I'd
add, the environmental history of the valley and its soil (419)

- largely misses the critique of Anglo-Saxonism, fails to see the ways in which
Saxon undergoes the enlightenment that Billy fails to---takes the early
statements about "real Americans" as static throughout

- a productive engagement with W.B. Michaels's "Race into Culture: A Critical
Genealogy of Cultural Identity". Basically uses WBM to argue for a combination
of birth and behavior in the assumption of a racialized identity

- I will need to reconcile the embrace of capitalism with the rejection of
growth---or at least the embrace of profitability and market relations.
Ultimately having a capitalism without growth and exploitation is the fantasy
that the novel's conclusion relies upon---it's like reestablishing the dream
that settlers were sold in California before being disenfranchised by the
railroads. 

### Jack London's Racial Lives


London paired stories to switch point of view, as in The Call of the Wild and
White Fang or in Adventure ( 1911 ) and “The Red One” ( 1916 ), in order to
reconsider an idea or value from an opposed point of view, what Lawrence I.
Berkove calls his “second thoughts.” The deeper psychology at play is
particularly obvious in London’s last few stories of 1916 , when his
revisionism especially on race was influenced by his reading of Carl Jung and
his growing awareness of his own relativity and mortality. In these last tales
he brilliantly rethinks earlier ideas about humanity, developing them into
a global sense of human community. (17)


- read "the house of pride" for an allegedly anti-racist story

London’s characters’ anxious relocations of personal and racial identities
among nonwhite Others... London is *worried* about race... (19)

Flora, despite her ambitious intentions for Johnny, helped create psychological
and racial divisions in her son’s sense of identity. As an antidote to her
racism, the di ff erent ideas of racial tolerance he absorbed from the
Prentisses and elsewhere seem to have remained an inner but powerful secret.
Sometimes that awareness was a source of shame and confusion for him, but at
other times, especially later in life, it was a point for him to steer by to
uphold family life as the politics of shared community and imaginative openness
to Others. (28)

- read "When the World Was Young" for another primitivist plot 

- notes London's "racialism" and the influence of theories of race that emerged
out of the natural sciences

But London departs from these Anglo-Saxon definitions in interesting ways.
First, though in the Klondike stories he praises the vigor of the Anglo-Saxon
hero, he also has in mind not just the relatively peaceable settler-farmer of
Anglo-Saxon villages, but the Viking-Norman warrior who overran the
AngloSaxons, the chaotic (not nation-building) “blond beast” of Nietzschean
fantasies, and an image he eventually gave up. It is a common mistake to read
London as a lifelong admirer of Nietzschean Superman heroes, such as the
often-cited Wolf Larsen of The Sea-Wolf ( 1904 ); in this book and nearly all
of London’s works— including notably his most famous short story “To Build
a Fire”—the “lone wolf” hero like Larson perishes. The hero who sticks with his
community of trail-mates survives. Second, London did not see the history of
the Anglo-Saxons as a unique race adventure but as expressing a universal
impulse. (37)

"Undeterred, as a “Distinguished Magazine Writer,” London gave a talk on
December 3 , 1899 , titled “The Expansion Policy” at Union Square Hall in San
Francisco, arguing that “There should be labor and food for all. We invent. We
take advantage of the forces of nature. We enslave the wind and waves. We put
shackles upon the unseen powers.” London argues for the logic of a more
efficient use of the land as the ethic of possession, these high-sounding words
followed by a comparison of slothful and industrious farmers to entire peoples,
and a clearer sense of who “We” might be: 

> A people possess a land.... If they cannot form a stable government, they
cannot guarantee law and order, nor, hence, can they develop the land. Shall
the land lie idle because the people have been false to the terms of their
tacit trust? And shall they reproach the fruitful earth by remaining upon it to
the exclusion of those who could develop it? ... If the original, lazy,
mismanaging owner be at all reasonable, he can take service under his more
strenuous brother. 71 

On the one hand London argues
for a socialist, universalist brotherhood in which there shall be no slaves,
but there is still the “right” of the advanced “brother” to take over the land
from “inefficients.” 72 This glaring philosophical conflict is typical of
London’s early writing." (41-2, quotes from London's talk "The Expansion
Policy" of Dec 3 1899)

- influence for Before Adam: August Weismann *Essays Upon Heredity and Kindred
Biological Problems* (45)

During the Spanish-American War, Jordan argued that “the Anglo-Saxon or any
other civilized race degenerates in the tropics,” a notion that comforted
London when he had to abandon the Snark voyage due to illness. 87 Here Jordan
was influenced by Benjamin Kidd’s The Control of the Tropics ( 1898 ), which
argued that white men could not develop the world’s tropical regions because
they could not be acclimatized to the tropics, and also that the races there
are separated from the white man “by thousands of years of development” and
thus cannot on their own develop their natural resources.(45) 

- this is part of the "scientific" polygenism argument

Haeckel: 

Ernst Haeckel ( 1843 – 1919 ) wrote to London on July 8 , 1907 , thanking him
for his copy of Before Adam . But as early as March 1 , 1900 , London had
written to Johns of Haeckel’s widely circulated idea that ontogeny
recapitulates phylogeny ; that is, the development of an animal embryo traces
the evolutionary history of its species. In History of Creation ( 1876 ) and
The Riddle of the Universe ( 1900 ), Haeckel also claimed that nonwhites were
incapable of inner culture and of higher mental development. 91 He invented
what he called “Monism” to study the world, including animals, human beings,
and society, as an evolutionary whole. London at first found Haeckel
“unassailable” ( Letters , 163 – 67 ) and called himself a Haeckelian “monist”
( Letters , 589 – 90 ), contrasting him to John Fiske ( 1842 – 1901 ),
a Harvard historian and philosopher and friend of Jordan’s who attempted to
fuse Spencer with Christianity.Eventually London rejected both of them. In his
Outlines of Cosmic Philosophy ( 1874 ), like Spencer Fiske proposes the
European ideology of the “Aryan” to organize a universal body of truth obtained
by science. 92 (Speaking of Fiske, Sciambra wryly notes, “None of the
racialists set minor goals for themselves.”) 93 Fiske thought of IndoEuropean
languages as descended from a “single ancestral language” traceable to the
legendary Aryans of the Hindu Vedas . 94 According to Sciambra, Fiske merged
evolution and religion but Haeckel converted evolution into a religion with the
obligatory call to race maintenance. 95 Though London rejected Fiske’s ideas,
he used some of them in forming certain “degenerate” characters (mostly white)
as “atavisms,” such as the dark, hairy antagonist in The Game ( 1905 ) or the
Chau ff eur in The Scarlet Plague . Haeckel traced superficial di ff erences
among the races using hair color and texture instead of Fiske’s phrenology.
This system allowed him to place Polynesians and Asians between whites and
“woolly-head” races, whom he compared to apes. To Fiske asymmetrical features
were also a sign of an inferior race; he believed only the Caucasian attains
complete symmetry in all parts of the body, what Haeckel called “the type of
perfect human beauty.” 96

- on Spencer, 48-50s

- Later in life, London sided with Huxley's largely anti-Spencerian Darwinism
against Spencerian social Darwininism

- Wow, this is Huxley, to whom London turned later in life. Cf Gilman and Ward:
'Huxley most cogently voiced his disagreement with Spencer in “Evolution and
Ethics,” the 1893 Romanes Lecture at Oxford University. Huxley saw nature
unsuitable as a moral guide for humans. Social Darwinism was a “fallacy,” for
social progress really means “a checking of the cosmic process at every step
and the substitution for it of another, which may be called an ethical process;
the end of which is not the survival of those who may happen to be the fittest,
but of those who are ethically the best.” He insists, “Let us understand, once
for all, that the ethical progress of every society depends, not on imitating
the cosmic process [of evolution], still less in running away from it, but in
combating it.” 126 Inspired by Darwin’s “tangled bank” metaphor, Huxley likened
human civilization to a carefully tended garden established in the wilderness,
opposing the “horticultural” to the “cosmic” process, given the garden’s
“artificial conditions of life, better adapted to the cultivated plants than
are the conditions of the state of nature.” There would always be a contest
between the “State of Nature” and the “State of Art of an organized polity,”
and this would continue until the State of Nature eventually prevailed. 127'

- !! I don't think Reesman is thinking of the species as a concept here, but
still interesting: 'Incorporating Darwin’s theories and Huxley’s analysis of
them into his imaginative expression and search for identity, and later falling
under the influence of Jung, London eventually found a creative self who could
finally conceive of “race” as encompassing the entire human race. But it took
his entire career to do so.' (54)

- check out Auerbach on London


#### Sonoma stuff

- check out Planchette for someone who dies going back to the land

Though Billy Roberts spouts pieties about Americans when he and Saxon encounter
groups of immigrant farmers, The Valley of the Moon in general advances an
idealistic sense of the future through rising in class, as in Martin Eden , but
also in returning to nature, as in Burning Daylight. (245)

- critics seem to largely read VM as sharing the uncomplicated racist views of
its protagonists without noting the ways in which those views collapse

- Not Reesman, who points out: "But to make too sharp a distinction between
these books is to miss the undercurrents of irony in both of them, for they
both contain counterdiscourses to complicate and subvert their surface
themes....In The Valley of the Moon Billy’s discourse is full of racist
anxiety, but this is balanced by Saxon’s gendered sense of cultural
relativity." (245)

- See London's review of Ghent and Brooks for a discussion of agrarianism as
feudalism and a continuation of the capitalist system (247)

- Source for VM: LeRoy Armstrong article in the Saturday Evening Post "The Man
Who Came Back: Two Twentieth Century Pilgrims Where They Landed" (247)

- On undercutting the racial "purity" of the VM protagonists: 251

- ( is it possible that the critique of Billy's racism is in part a critique of
the racism in American socialism of the moment? )

Saxon identifies with her female forebears’ “hard-working, hard-fighting stock”
( 103 ) but will lead her family to survive because of her ability
imaginatively to “pass” across California’s racial groups who represent
diversity, learning the best from all to construct a new identity as
a California woman. If anything, in The Valley of the Moon , racial mixing
turns out to be life-giving and adaptive, whereas racial purity appears to be
self-destructive. (251)



#### His reading

- Josiah Strong imagines a competition among races and Anglo-American conquest of
the world  (32-33)

- Huxley, Spencer

Reesman, Jeanne Campbell. Jack London's Racial Lives, University of Georgia
Press, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, .
Created from columbia on 2017-06-05 09:58:18.


## Misc sources

### Bohemian Grove and the Making of the Bourgeois-Bohemian

(199) London was indeed a member of the Bohemian Club with Frank Norris, and
Comte was also a member!

- but my general sense is that this was a big, bougie club and they may not
have had that much contact... 

### Utility and Beauty should be one...

fascinating but nothing entirely new about the literature or
influences---consult for details of ranch and the thinking/values that went
into it

### Labor Symbolic Wilderness

Four versions:

1. The White Silence --- an unexpected Eden in which people survive by letting
go of fixed habits and adapting to environment; unforgiving but rewards
adaptation

2. Melanesia --- unremittingly cruel and destructive, indifferent to
virtue---kind of a climatic theory of race and humanity here, suggesting that
the cruelty of the jungles turns people into "savages"

3. Polynesia --- Eden itself. A glorification of the place and its people
(though in a primitivist way)

4. The Valley of the Moon. In addition to the eponymous novel, Labor cites
*BD*, *WF*, The Abysmal Brute, and Little Lady of the Big House


