---
title: Gilman’s Garden&#58; *Herland* and the Good Anthropocene
author: Phillip R. Polefrone
fontsize: 12pt
geometry: margin=1in
bibliography: bibliography.bib
csl: csl/mla-note.csl
...

### Introduction

In her utopian novel *Herland* (1915), Charlotte Perkins Gilman creates “a land
in a state of perfect cultivation, where even the forests looked as if they
were cared for; a land that looked like an enormous park, only that it was even
more evidently an enormous garden”; a land with “clean, well-built
roads,…attractive architecture,…[and] ordered beauty”; a land more “petted”
than any before seen (“even in Germany”), in which practically all of the trees
are “[f]ood-bearing.”[@gilman_herland_2012 42-4] It is a world unto itself that
blends the built and natural environments to free its human and nonhuman
inhabitants from scarcity. The soil has been improved and the wildlife managed
with such care that no farming is necessary in the way we understand it---the
land *provides*, without the coercion of agricultural labor. Nobody seems to
direct the maintenance of this environment, and yet it is maintained by the
effortless and seemingly automatic contributions of Herland's people. Some keep
careful watch for destructive elements of the ecology, while others bring the
most nutritional plants and nuts to communal eating houses---taken together,
they completely fulfill Herland's need for meals just as reliably and evenly as
the environment provides the ingredients. This is a society that has grown
together with its environment in mutual sustenance, a garden in which the human
grows in tandem with other organisms, each producing naturally what the other
needs to survive. Herland's forests are not, in other words, the “rank” and
“tangled” vegetation that Gilman sees in the world beyond.[@gilman_herland_2012
67] The people and land alike have evolved beyond competition and into a degree
of refinement attainable only through cooperation.

*Herland* is often read primarily for its proto-feminist vision of a society
populated only by women---and understandably so; this is the explicit
centerpiece of the novel.[^ln-feminist-readings] <!-- summary -->The short work consciously follows
the utopian structure that has been standard since Thomas More: it describes an
isolated country discovered by a small expedition, combining narrative elements
with essayistic elaboration of a society that compares favorably with the
conditions of the author's own time and place. In *Herland*, Vandyck (the
narrator), Jeff, and Terry discover Herland by accident on a scientific
expedition through remote, unidentified regions (unidentified, Vandyck says,
for the protection of Herland). After launching a second expedition with
a small aircraft, they go beyond Herland's formerly impassable boundaries,
become imprisoned after refusing to be taken in by the Herlanders, and remain
in gentle confinement as they learn the secrets of the country. As they become
fluent in the language and are allowed to move more freely, they learn that
Herland is a society consisting only of women who reproduce parthenogenetically
(from an unfertilized egg). Two thousand years before Vandyck and company's
arrival, the nation that preceded Herland was decimated by war and retreated to
the mountainous region that would become Herland. A volcano eruption filled in
the mountain pass that was their single means of egress, trapping them
indefinitely. The nation was a slave-holding one, and its enslaved population
used their opportunity to kill the nation's unenslaved men; the women, who
vastly outnumbered the remaining men, retaliated in kind. With only women left,
they had resigned themselves to watching the end of their civilization, unable
to escape, until a young woman spontaneously became pregnant. She bore five
children, who themselves bore five children, and so on until a desirable
population was reached---at which point they stopped, as they reproduce only
when they want to. All of Herland is descended from this single woman. In their
Herland residency, the men learn from the Herland way of life, and except for
the irredeemably chauvinistic Terry, all come away deeply influenced by the
women of Herland and their values. 

[^ln-feminist-readings]: See @sutton-ramspeck_introduction_2013 22;

After being self-published in Gilman's one-woman journal, *The Forerunner*, in
1915, the novel was largely forgotten until it was revived by feminist critics
in the 1980s, whose interest in it was understandably grounded in their own
critical project. *Herland* criticism since has largely followed suit, with
exceptions most notably discussing Gilman's literary naturalism and her
socialist economic theory. No less central, however, if much less discussed, are the
novel's insights into the role of human activity in shaping natural systems.
The Herland environment is marked by benign but absolute human control over the
natural environment. While there is very little agriculture or cultivation in
the traditional sense, Herlanders have chosen to retain and support certain
elements of the ecosystem while systematically reducing or removing others,
resulting in a food-production system that is able to persist largely without
intensive crop planting---a system more reminiscent of permaculture than any of
the prevailing horticultural models of the time. Herland is a woman-made Eden:
what Leo Marx calls a "middle landscape," or a place that is symbolically
"created by mediation between art and nature," eschewing both back-to-the-land
primitivism and technological futurism to create a zone in which nature and
culture are mutually supportive. [@marx_machine_2000 71; see also
@chang_economics_2010 342-3] 

But Gilman's garden is more than an Edenic fantasy and more than a "middle
landscape"; in understanding the totality and character of humanity's influence
on the natural world, she anticipates a model of ecological thinking premised
on the existence of the Anthropocene. As McKenzie Wark says of Bogdanov and
Platonov, Marxist writers working contemporaneously with Gilman or just after,
we might say that in *Herland* "the Anthropocene already appears as an object
of thought and action in all but name," as it does for the other naturalist
works in this study [@wark_molecular_2015 xx]. 

The Anthropocenic ecological consciousness that develops among the Herlanders
arises because they suddenly find themselves living in a closed system, and
a small one at that, defined geographically by a triangular, “high-standing
spur,” a "piece of geography [that] stands up like a basalt column" in a “dark
green sea of crowding forest,” isolated and inaccessible to the rest of the
world [@gilman_herland_2012 41, 67]. In the face of limited resources and with
no hope of international trade or expansion, they are forced to confront the
ways in which even pre-modern human systems dominate and define the natural
systems they are drawn from. But they do not take either system as immutable:
as the Herland population grows, it develops social, economic, and ecological
management systems that allow them to live within the limits they have while
simultaneously pushing those limits outwards. Herland's sustainability, and
indeed its survival, result from a coevolution of nature and culture---not
a symbolic resolution as in Leo Marx's "middle landscape," but a resolution
based in material practices and the physical environment. Herlanders still have
a determinative influence over their environment, but by transforming their
collective practices, Herlanders are able to guide their determination of
natural systems, shaping a process that is often unthinking and destructive to
make it conscious, progressive, and supportive of a flourishing ecosystem. This
willingness to consciously influence both sides of the human-ecological
equation presents a conflict of control and limitation: on one hand is the
impulse to manage "natural" systems to prevent catastrophe; and on the other,
an awareness that human systems, often expansionist and wasteful, are
themselves the cause of environmental crisis.

Gilman sought to navigate this tension between limitation and control by
drawing from a reservoir of early ecological thinking that would eventually
give rise to the American conservation movement. Among her most cherished
correspondents and friends was Lester Ward, whose work as a natural scientist
and as a foundational figure of sociology found itself caught between the same
two poles. Though best known as a sociologist, Ward was also a geologist and
paleobotanist, at one time serving as the Chief Paleontologist of the U.S.
Geological Survey [@burnham_lester_1956 2; @ross_man_1975 51] He made
significant contributions to an American conservationism defined by limits of
human growth and resource use, particularly in his work with Major John Wesley
Powell: Ward's mentor and the director of the U.S. Geological Survey, Powell
laid the groundwork for the Reclamation Act of 1902 and trained the scientists
who would carry the call for responsible resource use into the twentieth
century [@ross_man_1975 51, 53, 57, 59; see also @stegner_beyond_1992]. As
a proponent of control, however, Ward articulated a vision of the human's place
in nature that seems contrary to the spirit of limitation that has motivated
traditional environmentalism. In Ward's view, the human is both the end-product
of evolution and the agent that takes over where evolution leaves off---both
part of nature and the end of it. This complicated dual role justifies the
"laying open of her [nature's] bowels" for experimentation, an explicitly
Baconian perspective that understands the human as the rightful "master" of
non-human organisms and processes [@ward_dynamic_1926 11-2]. The Wardian view
of nature promotes absolute mastery without exploitation---Prometheanism in the
name of stewardship.[^prometheanism]

[^prometheanism]: explain prometheanism; use robinson article.

This tension between limitation and control has hardly been resolved in the
century since *Herland* first appeared in *The Forerunner*. To read *Herland*
ecocritically now, in the dawn not of the Anthropocene but of our consciousness
of it, is to recognize this enclosed garden civilization as a fictional
laboratory for the scientific, sociological, and ethical issues that define
thinking about the Anthropocene. More specifically, her and Ward's ambivalence
regarding the status of the human in nature---to put it somewhat reductively,
either as destroyer or savior---prefigures a contemporary controversy over the
possibility of a "good Anthropocene." Both center on the same question: should
our absolute control over non-human nature be understood as a justified
evolutionary step, or does the very premise of absolute control violate the
material and ethical limitations of the planet? 

The perspective that favors control is at the heart of any robust defense of
the good Anthropocene. At its most basic, the "good Anthropocene" movement is
what it sounds like, suggesting that there is some version of the Anthropocene
that will not result in catastrophe for humans and non-human nature, and indeed
that embracing human influence over the planetary ecology could ultimately
benefit all involved. There are many visions of what a good Anthropocene would
mean, but they come together in rejecting the catastrophic or "dystopian"
visions of our environmental future, seeking instead ways to use technological
and social innovations to reduce further damage and even repair the damage that
has been done---to turn the Anthropocene into "a more just, prosperous, and
ecologically diverse" epoch [@bennett_bright_2016]. The most radical and
controversial articulation of the "good Anthropocene," and probably the most
widely circulated, has been "An Ecomodernist Manifesto" (2015). The signatories
of the manifesto argue that the route to a good Anthropocene is
(counterintuitively and, many would say, counterfactually) "decoupling human
development from environmental impacts" by "intensifying many human
activities---particularly farming, energy extraction, forestry, and
settlement." Concentrating these activities in smaller areas, they reason, will
allow us to leave more land completely wild; but their emphasis is always on
a Promethean faith in humanity's ability to tinker its way out of any
limitations, or in their words, "putting humankind's extraordinary powers" to
work. In short, they celebrate human technological triumphs over nature,
rehearsing a familiar narrative of a liberatory technology that frees humanity
from the drudgery of agricultural labor.[^ln-ecomodern-responses] 

[^ln-ecomodern-responses]: The responses to this manifesto will be discussed in
more detail later, but have tended to bring existing critiques of modernism to
bear on this new instantiation of it. The apparent ease with which the
Anthropocene is able to become a "good" thing elides differential risk and
responsibility as well as a long history of disenfranchisement from land and
resources. Ecomodernism, in other words, is just a way to prop up a facile
progressivism in green clothing. See Latour, Crist, and Collard et al.

Milder approaches than the Ecomoderns' to the concept are less comfortable with
this triumphalism, focusing more on the need to resist dystopian visions of
catastrophe in order to promote forms of resilience and transition in their stead. In
the words of Bennett et al. (2016), "The future does not have to be
bleak....Whether or not one agrees with these [dystopian] characterizations,
extrapolations of current, maladaptive trends into a bleak future run the risk
of becoming self-fulfilling, because people base their actions on what they
believe about society and their future" (441). They continue to offer a range
of solutions that acknowledge the need for social and economic transition to
a greater degree than the authors of "An Ecomodernist Manifesto," creating
a database of "seeds" (initiatives) in a taxonomy of approaches and areas of
intended impact. While unlikely to evade social and environmentalist critique,
this version of the "good Anthropocene" at least includes new forms of
"equitable opportunities for decision making" in its range of goals, as well as
initiatives that explore ways to repurpose traditional sustainable agriculture
techniques (443-5). It is, in other words, a "good Anthropocene" that leans on
plurality rather than a universalist progressive narrative.

And yet, even the pluralist "good Anthropocene" leaves unanswered the most
fundamental questions of ethical and material limitations to a "progress"
premised on human domination of nature. Ethically, the good Anthropocene is
defined by the old (but undismissable) problem of anthropocentrism. As Bruno
Latour points out in his response, the Manifesto "is written entirely as if
humans were still alone on stage, the only being who out of its own free will
is in charge of apportioning space, land, money and value to the old Mother
Nature....[T]he ecomodernists are also *uchronists*, as if they were living at
a time when they alone were in command" (223). On the contrary, the
Anthropocene "modifies the scale, the speed, the rhythm and, more importantly,
the distribution of active agents in any political conversation we have about
the entanglement of humans and non-humans" (222-3). In this version of the
Anthropocene, more redolent of the Anthropocene conversation in general, the
centrality of humans to the epoch does not bespeak absolute control. Rather, at
center stage is the rapidity with which human action, whether intentional or
a product simply of scale, can influence non-human organisms and communities in
ways we could never predict, let alone hope to marshal. The recognition of this
kind of entanglement has compelled Donna Haraway to set aside the Anthropocene
moniker entirely in favor of what she calls the "Chthulucene," a "name for the
dynamic ongoing sym-chthonic forces and powers of which people are a part" and
which demands "intense commitment and collaborative work and play with other
[non-human] terrans" (160). The problem with even imagining the level of
control Ecomoderns assume out of hand is that it hubristically simplifies these
entanglements, reducing a vast multitude of actors to a single, determining
one. 

The problem with ignoring entanglement is ethical, in that it devalues the
contributions of non-human actors, but it also runs up against the same kinds
of limits the Herlanders do when they find themselves in an open-air biosphere,
short on resources and long on hungry bellies, and above all ill equipped to
work with their environment to solve the problem. Entanglement becomes a matter
of cold, wet fact when we recognize that this multitude of actors determines
how one sees the material limitations to economic growth. If human actors are
the only thing that make a difference, we as a species (imagined as an
uncomplicated collective) can surely surpass our immediate limitations, just
like we always do, no matter how unknown the state of our future environment.
This assumption undergirds the Manifesto's peculiar claim that "there is still
remarkably little evidence that human population and economic expansion will
outstrip the capacity to grow food or procure critical material resources in
the foreseeable future"---a notion can only be maintained within the limited
frame of the economist's graph. As Eileen Crist points out, the Manifesto only
admits for evidence certain "insuperable obstacle[s]" to growth, "such as
a hard agronomic boundary in food production or the depletion of some
indispensable and non-substitutable resource" (251). These variables leave out
the very real disappearance of biodiversity to an unheard-of degree, mass
extinctions on a scale that would usually be understood as an epoch-defining
catastrophe---or Crist puts it: "mass extinction does not have a technical
solution" (250-1, 247). But even the economist's variables should not be so
easily passed over. Absolute agronomic limits may not have been encountered
yet, at least not in the sense of food consumption truly outstripping the
capacity for food production, but rapid ecological collapses in response to
climate change could bring those limits rapidly into play. 

In *Herland*, Gilman offers a way of thinking through situations like the one
faced by twenty-first-century environmentalists, in which the ethical limits of
control abut the material limits of a full world. More specifically, her novel
and its scientific context constitute both the deep roots of "good
Anthropocene" thinking and a unique model of it, acknowledging the scale of
human influence on the environment while suggesting that this influence should
be guided rather than lessened. But Gilman's good Anthropocene realizes what
more contemporary formulations of it too often miss: namely, that if embracing
human control of natural systems can lead to a more sustainable world ecology,
we will have to rethink some of the fundamental human categories that have been
most impactful. Her Herlanders perform just such a reevaluation: revising their
concepts of of labor, value, and inhabitation becomes the basis of their
survival in the face of circumstances comparable to those of our full,
overtaxed, and deteriorating planet. This version of the good Anthropocene is
premised on a web of mutual determination between the physical environment, the
economy, and social structures, arguing for a more nuanced understanding of
"progress" that relies on refinement rather than growth. Despite this apparent
foresight, however, it also foreshadows the hubris and ethical problems that
mar the very notion of a "good" Anthropocene a century later. Reading *Herland*
in the Anthropocene, then, demonstrates the persistence of the idea that the
human is simultaneously the biggest threat to the health of the world ecology
and its only possible savior. It also offers an anticipatory example of the
conceptual reworking that the Anthropocene demands.

<!--These contradictions cut to the heart of
the naturalist philosophy in the way they deal with environmental determinism.
Granting the fundamental premise of determinism, she complicates it by placing
the human at both ends of the equation, as both a guide for the "forces" that
determine ecological development and one of many elements of the system those
forces determine. This principle of codetermination constitutes a form of
Utopian Naturalism that both characterizes the contemporary good Anthropocene
debate and exposes its philosophical limits.-->


<!--
old intro, may weave parts into the paragraph above:
In what follows, I will argue that Charlotte Perkins Gilman uses the garden as a framing device to depict a system in which management of environment replaces
the market cycle of production and consumption, collective sustenance becomes
the end-goal of the economy, and the human coevolves (both culturally and
literally) with its environment. After exposing how Gilman uses world
construction as a mode of ecotopian argumentation, I will show that the
ecological entanglement of built and natural environments creates a garden
economy in which labor, subsumed into being, ceases to be an exploitative
activity, and vitality becomes the mechanism and end-goal of the economy. In
the second section, I will argue that this relationship to the environment
leads to a coevolutionary system in which biological determinism, environmental
determinism, and education all contribute to a growing-together of humanity
with nature. This process, as I will show, can be most effectively understood
in its similarity to the Marxian “metabolism” of town and
country.[^ln-marxism-gilman] I will conclude by returning to my initial
question---What does *Herland* offer to the environmental humanities now as a
text of transition to a post-fossil fuel economy and ecology?---and pointing to
some of the environmental valences of Gilman's particular utopian brand of
literary naturalism.

[^ln-marxism-gilman]: With this part of the argument, I hope to question the
general silence between Marxist criticism and Gilman scholarship. Walter Benn
Michaels’s reading of “The Yellow Wallpaper” in *The Gold Standard and the
Logic of Literary Naturalism* is an immediate and notable exception to this
silence.
-->


### Lester Ward on the Human's Place in Ecology

<!--See Worster for additional
commentary on Ward in ecological context. 5-10 pp?-->


If Gilman speaks to the concerns of the Anthropocene, it is in part because she
was writing *Herland* in a moment when the systemic influence of human activity
on the planet was becoming visible to early ecologists and conservationists.
The deep roots of the *good* Anthropocene in particular can be found in the work
of Lester F. Ward, but also the moment of scientific thinking he represents.
Ecology at the end of the nineteenth century and the beginning of the twentieth
were defined by the contrasting poles of limitation, established by the
revolutionary work of George Perkins Marsh, and exultation over human
domination of nature, which is more in step with the overwhelming Victorian
trend toward "civilization."[^ln-victorian-ecology] 

[^ln-victorian-ecology]: On Marsh's general influence, see Marsh's *Man and
Nature: Or, Physical Geography as Modified by Human Action* and David
Lowenthal's introduction to the Belknap Press edition. Lowenthal argues
elsewhere that Marsh should be seen as an early marker of Anthropocene
awareness: @lowenthal_origins_2016, largely because of his anticipation of the
human as a geological force and his emphasis on the destructive outcomes of
human scale and interference. .

Gilman's reimagining of labor and inhabitation occurs in the tension
established by these poles, just as Ward's sociology does. She also adopts from
his first major work, *Dynamic Sociology*, a version of ecology in which
economics and democratic governance can---indeed, should---play a constitutive
role. As Cynthia J. Davis has shown,[^ln-ward-gilman-scholarship] Ward's
influence on Gilman's thinking, and *Herland* in particular, is considerable,
and this influence was more visible and determinative than similar influences
might be for other authors [@davis_his_2003]. In *The Man-Made World, or Our
Androcentric Culture*, Gilman articulates a vision of engaged fiction that
would forward the ideas of other works, "teach[ing] not by preaching but by
truly re-presenting" [qtd. in @davis_his_2003 73]. This is an effective summary
of her approach in *Herland*. While the sociological and evolutionary elements
of this influence have been discussed by Davis and others, Ward's *ecological*
thinking had no less of a role in forming Gilman's novel, and provides an
important background to the way she theorizes the place of the human within
a larger ecology. She does not reproduce Ward's thinking exactly, however.
Rather, her fictional extrapolation of his theories *dramatizes* the tension
between the absolute limits of and absolute control over the planet and its
processes. Responding to Ward in fiction rather than theory (a type of writing
with which she was at least as comfortable) allows her to root these expansions
in daily life and embodied practice.

<!-- Marsh paragraph -->Ward's training as a natural scientist was rooted in
the nascent traditions of ecology and American conservationism. The general
bakckground to this training was established by Marsh's *Man and Nature*
(1864). The "most influential text of its time next to Darwin's *On the Origin
of Species*," Marsh's classic work of conservationism made him "the first to
realize that man's environmental impacts were not only enormous and horrific,
but perhaps irreversibly cataclysmic" [@lowenthal_origins_2016 56]. Marsh built
on the first inklings of climate science[^ln-humboldt-climate-science] in
Alexander von Humboldt's *Personal Narrative of Travels to the Equinoctal
Regions of America* (1852) to demonstrate that human influence across "woods,"
"waters," and "sands" has been universally malignant, notwithstanding the
modest success of reforestation efforts [-@marsh_man_1965 13, 175-7, 43-4]. His
relevance to thinking about limitation and conservation in the Anthropocene has
been bolstered by his conclusion that "human action must rank among geological
influences," a simple statement that anticipates the defining tenet of the
Anthropocene [-@marsh_man_1965 464]. 

[^ln-humboldt-climate-science]: The argument for Humboldt as an early climate
science belongs to Andrea Wulf's *The Invention of Nature* (2016). 

<!--Marsh, Powell, Ward-->The most directly scientific work Ward did in his
career was conducted in an environment where Marsh's proto-Anthropocenic ideas
were common currency. Ward conducted scientific surveys under John Wesley
Powell at the U.S. Geological Survey at a time when its aims were defined by
the nascent conservation movement Marsh's work had, in large part, sparked
[@worster_river_2000 484].[^ln-powell-reads-marsh] Ward's own work for the
survey was defined by these conservation-minded goals, but there was a more
general exchange of ideas between Powell and Ward that would define Ward's
early work.[^ln-powell-influences-ward]  To place Ward, Powell, and Marsh in
too close an intellectual proximity would be a mistake, but Marsh's brand of
conservation and his awareness of the deleterious influence of human activity
on nature defined the intellectual environment with which Ward's theories would
either have to integrate or contend. It was likely this early experience, in
part, that led Ward to develop a friendship and correspondence with Ernst
Haeckel, who is most famous now for coining the term
"ecology."[^ln-ward-and-haeckel]

[^ln-powell-reads-marsh]: In all likelihood, Powell read *Man and Nature*---the
work's influence alone is enough to make a confident inference; John R. Ross,
though citing no evidence himself, claims that "Powell read Marsh's work and
remembered the lessons" in his early surveys [@ross_man_1975 52-3]. Regardless,
the movement Marsh's work spawned defined the parameters within which Powell's
own work in the Geological Survey proceeded, not least when Ward joined the
agency in 1881.

[^ln-powell-influences-ward]: *Dynamic Sociology* is dedicated to Major Powell,
and Powell gave Ward his position in part to support him while he completed his
book [@ross_man_1975 51-2]; Donald Worster describes Ward as almost "a brother
with whom [Powell] sometimes argued intensely" (442). Ward also cites Powell's
thoughts on ethnology and religion in *Dynamic Sociology* [@ward_dynamic_1926
II:254-8].

[^ln-ward-and-haeckel]: Need to cite this a bit more... Ward wrote a paper
summarizing Haeckel's ideas. See Worster and others for Ward's correspondence.

<!-- Ward adhering to and breaking from ecology/conservation-->To a significant
degree, Ward should be understood as breaking from this early wave of
conservation defined by Marsh and Powell, insofar as he sees (contrary to
Marsh) human control of nature as not only largely benign, but a necessary
evolutionary step for all life on Earth. Donald Worster places Ward in the company of those in "the late
Victorian age, from the 1860s to the end of the century" for whom "there
appeared an unusually fierce determination to make the civilizing process stick
good and tight, once and for all." Doing so meant employing the "aggressive,
resolute, even violent force of Culture to harness and subdue the nature" that
was "menacing," immoral, and simply uncouth [-@worster_natures_1985 170-5] It
would be a mistake, then, to align Ward with his conservationist mentors,
but writing off their influence entirely (as often happens in discussions
of Ward) would elide an important element of ecological consciousness in his
work.[^ln-worster-apologia] He claims that the social sciences
should consciously follow on the discoveries and methods of the natural
sciences, lamenting erroneous assumptions by his contemporaries
that could have been avoided "had sociology been thoroughly grounded in
biology, as Comte so justly insisted that it should be" [-@ward_dynamic_1926
87]. This aside confirms---and confirms as deliberate---what is already clear
in *Dynamic Sociology*: that Ward's sociology is built on a foundation of
knowledge we now recognize as the beginnings of ecology. 

[^ln-worster-apologia]: In *Nature's Economy*, Worster frames this ecological
consciousness as "an ecological counterpart" to Ward's "social ideals," but in
fact it would be more accurate to say that his sociology arises out of
a rigorous training in the natural sciences[-@worster_natures_1985 170-5]. This
relationship is much clearer in Worster's later work on Major Powell, which is
more concerned with *Dynamic Sociology* than with Ward's later works
[-@worster_river_2000 440-8]. It is no coincidence that a discussion of Ward's
earlier works would note the ecological influence on his sociology, as *Dynamic
Sociology* was written during a period of Powell's intellectual and financial
support.

<!--Ward's system as it relates to environmental destruction-->Insisting on an
ecology-based sociology as Ward does is bound to trouble the distinction
between human and nature. And indeed, in his discussion of sustainable resource
use, the aspects of human behavior that are most disruptive are the very
characteristics that are most "natural." When Ward discusses wastefulness in
modern human societies, he includes what we would now think of as a lack of
sustainable development. But it is also framed as part of the *natural* working
of things. In the first place, Ward does not consider nature itself an
efficient or sustainable system: "Nature acts on the assumption that her
resources are inexhaustible," he says, anticipating the critiques of
Ecomodernism but directing them against nature itself [-@ward_dynamic_1926 87].
This critique also appears to include the human as part of nature, however, as
he continues to argue that in human industry the "same wasteful methods prevail
in society as in the animal and vegetable kingdoms" [@ward_dynamic_1926 88].
Natural limits to growth emerge as a concept not as a feature of the land or
the planetary ecology itself, but as a factor of human ignorance and
wastefulness---the part of the human, we now understand, that is still closest
to "nature":

> The natural resources of the earth are squandered with a wanton disregard of
the future. The forests are cut down to supply temporary wants, consumed by
escaping campfires, or purposely cleared for tillage, until the habitable
portions of the earth are successively transformed into lifeless deserts. The
soil is rapidly exhausted by the first occupants, who know only the immediate
present. The wild animals useful to man are soon extinguished by the heartless
destruction of the fertile females and helpless young. [-@ward_dynamic_1926 89]

Ward exhibits here a Marsh-like awareness of systemic environmental destruction
at the end of the most ecologically relevant portion of *Dynamic Sociology*, an
unexpected elegy for needlessly wasted life and squandered fruitfulness.
Perhaps surprisingly (to a contemporary reader, at least), Ward's solution is
again not to become more like nature, but to root out what "nature" remains in
us. 

This equation of nature with "waste" provides a backdrop for Ward's Baconian
vision of science as a tool for mastering nature and exceeding
limits.[^ln-ward-cites-bacon] In a moment of seeming humility for the species,
Ward calls the human "an integral part of this great unconscious creative whole
called nature, only a minute fraction of which can by any possible means be
brought within the range of his experience" [-@ward_dynamic_1926 11]. But to
Ward, the intelligence and teleological capacity of humanity at once makes us
the apex of all natural systems and gives us the right to take over for natural
processes. It is as if nature developed humanity as its head, and naturally we
have since taken control of the organisms and systems that produced us. Taking
control is justified by the fact that humanity and human intelligence are the
products and propagators of "organization." Organization, intelligence, and
teleological action are inherently linked in Ward's evolutionary system, and
the human is the apex of all three. Evolution has a "tendency to organization,"
and "consciousness and intelligence are products of [this] organization";
additionally, "teleological action has...kept pace with the degree of
intelligence" [-@ward_dynamic_1926 10]. While "nature's processes are not
teleologic but genetic," humans differ in that their "conscious action
is...teleological" [-@ward_dynamic_1926 9]. But this is where it becomes
impossible to maintain the human-nature distinction: nature's activity
*becomes* teleological in that the human, still understood as part of nature,
uses purposive action and science to guide natural development. The human thus
becomes part of the evolutionary process---or rather, in Ward's eyes, *could*
and *should* do so, but only *will* when humans assume the
mantle.[^ln-mind-and-darwinism]

[^ln-ward-cites-bacon]: Ward cites Bacon approvingly to say that "Nature can
only be conquered by obeying her" [-@ward_dynamic_1926 13].

[^ln-mind-and-darwinism]: A Darwinian to a point, Ward understands that "Mind
is found only at the end of the series, and not at the beginning. It is the
distinctive attribute of the creature, and not of the creator. It resides in
man, and not in nature" [-@ward_dynamic_1926 10-11]. He breaks from Darwinian
evolution in positing the possibility of understanding human activity as part
of the evolutionary process---including artificial selection as well as natural
selection as an evolutionary mechanism. 


<!--Ward on carrying capacity... use this to play out the conflict-->The status
of the human with respect to nature---as its apex and exception at
once---ignores ethical limits to human control; its effect on absolute limits
to growth is more ambiguous. Just like the proponents of a good Anthropocene,
Ward acknowledges absolute limits only on the way to exulting in humanity's
ability to surpass them---despite, or perhaps because of, his theories'
grounding in an ecology that takes the human as part of its purview.
A particularly telling example arises in his discussion of carrying capacity,
or the number of a given species an environment is able to support (taking into
consideration factors such as climate, resource availability, space, and other
species). Ward does not use the term "carrying capacity" directly, even though
it was beginning to be used in some agricultural and botanical contexts---it
would not enter more general use until either Aldo Leopold employed it in 1933
or, more probably, in post-war ecological circles [@robbins_carrying_2006].
But, whether he came to it independently or whether the concept was more mobile
than the term,  Ward is certainly talking about carrying capacity in all but
name: 

> [I]n the uncontrolled operation of natural laws, beings capable of feeling
are liable to injury. In an ever-changing environment, that degree of
correspondence can never be reached in which no friction can occur. It is this
perpetual conflict of every species with its adverse surroundings, this
grinding at the outer boundaries of its sphere of activity, which constantly
keeps its numbers down to moderate limits and its members restricted to
definite geographical areas. [-@ward_dynamic_1926 14]

Thus it is for other species, anyway. For the human, a superior degree of
adaptation, driven directly by a superior intelligence, increases the ratio of
those who "make it" many times over---the limits of nature are always
surpassed, but without (apparently) backlash of famine or despoliation:

> In man this ratio [of non-survival] is less than in any other animal, and it
is this which has enabled him, to so much greater an extent than any other
animal, to increase his numbers and expand his territorial limits. This has
been due to his superior sagacity and cunning, to his intelligence....
[Humanity's gains] must be attributed to an increased acquaintance with its
relations to the world around it. [-@ward_dynamic_1926 14]

The Baconian imperative to "interpret" nature without "serving"
it[^ln-bacon-interpres] is expressed here as a surpassing of limits, but
surpassing limits is paradoxically entwined with being aware of them. Ward
encourages growth, but only through careful study of the environment. This
"study" appears to include the negative effects of that growth if and when they
are encountered, for Ward's desire for humanity to surpass all limits is not
without qualification: he acknowledges that "the rapid multiplication of
individuals could not long continue and would not be economically desirable,"
rendering the "large amount of friction that currently exists" between humanity
and its environments as a check against ruination [-@ward_dynamic_1926 15-6].
But despite these Malthusian misgivings, Ward still frames limitation in
general as a source of "a vast amount of physical and mental suffering" that
our intelligence should liberate us from. Our greater degree of "organization"
and ingenuity forestalls the natural limits to which, as a part of nature, we
are still ultimately subject.

[^ln-bacon-interpres]: Did I talk about this? I think not; cite here

<!-- government as a surprising stage in evolution, as guiding force and
product-->Not all human ingenuity is technological in Ward's mind, however, nor
is physical technology even the most important development. The greatest
achievement of this evolutionary system based on increasing organization is
even more organization, in the form of communities and government. Ward sees
government as a development of an evolutionary imperative toward "[a]ltruistic
morality," which "arises as soon as intelligence begins to counteract the
natural influences which restrict population" and lead to suffering
[-@ward_dynamic_1926 14]. It is an "egoistic altruism, protecting others for
the benefit of self," but the benefits of this altruism are still essentially
communal [-@ward_dynamic_1926 14]. Propagation beyond limits relies on this communal
instinct:

> One of the secrets of the success of the human race in peopling the entire
globe has been this moral sense which protects others where natural laws would
destroy them. Government, which has this extra-natural protection for its
object, had its rise in this altruistic sentiment.... [-@ward_dynamic_1926 14]

Intelligence, though it is a product of evolution's tendency toward greater
organization, works against the main driver of Darwinian evolution, natural
selection and the "friction" between an organism and its environment. The means
by which these environmental influences are managed is government protection.
And yet, as we can see in his discussion of sustainability, collective action,
through government or otherwise, is also the means by which *human* influences
on non-human nature are managed. A greater degree of human
organization---which, for Ward and Gilman both, means collective
action---mediates the codetermination of human and natural systems. 
 
<!--set up contrast with spencer-->That Gilman took her evolutionary theory
from the ecology-driven theories of Lester Ward sets her apart from the rest of
American literary naturalism. Ward's emphasis on the altruistic and communal
side of evolution sets him apart from other evolutionary commentators and
theorists of the period, most notably Herbert Spencer, a widely read social
Darwinist who influenced many literary naturalists (particularly Dreiser). The
fundamental points on which Ward and Spencer differ are the applicability of
biological evolutionary theory and competition---the messy randomness and the
"survival of the fittest"---to the affairs of humanity. Ward complained that
Spencer's relentless focus on biology failed to take into account the
peculiarities of human mind, insofar as Spencer "failed to make [psychology]
the basis of either his sociology or his ethics" [@ward_psychologic_1893 464].
As a result, he sees Spencer's work as setting forth the "underlying
principles" for the "Physiocrats" whose "writings...constitute the warp of
modern individualism"---a group in which he includes Adam Smith, Thomas
Malthus, and David Ricardo [@ward_psychologic_1893 464]. The "Physiocratic"
view assumes that human enterprises follow the same rules as biological
evolution, while also assuming that biological evolution results in the most
efficient outcomes. 

<!--ward against competition, efficiency of nature-->Ward disputes both
assumptions. Competition, from the Physiocratic perspective, ultimately leads
to stability and optimization. Placing this view in ecological context, Worster
relates Spencer's view of evolution to the "climax community"---or a stable
community of organisms that results from innumerable generations of struggle
for survival: "It was the paradoxical belief of both of these men [Spencer and
Clements] that the war of each against all for the essentials of life results
in a more harmonious social or ecological organism" [@worster_natures_1985
214]. Ward rejected this competitive individualism. Cynthia J. Davis relates
Ward's belief that "natural competition...checked rather than enhanced
evolution" to his belief in reform: "As did many progressives...he resisted
biological determinism and embraced Lamarckianism, as the belief in the
biological transmission of *acquired* traits helped explain variation and
emphasized human agency" [-@davis_his_2003 75]. Emphasizing human agency is
necessary in Ward's system because, in his view, human intervention is the only
route to efficiency---precisely because it allows competition to be replaced by
cooperation. In nature, "Even the vegetation is at war, and the result of that
strife is immensely to lower the possible standard of every living species of
plant" [@ward_dynamic_1926 87-8]. Artificially guided development is a way to
take humans out of that war---with each other and with the rest of nature.

<!-- development of human structures from within-->A peaceful coexistence
is not imagined as an automatic effect of human intelligence, however. The
Hobbesian "war of all against all" is still posited as a paradigm for
understanding human interactions with each other and with the environment, as
is the case in Spencer; in contrast to Spencer, however, Ward takes it as an
insufferable status quo that humanity must develop its way out of through
communal purposive action. Doing so defines "the very great hope of social
science" to which Ward saw himself as contributing:

> [The sociologist] learns that within that great group of phenomena subject to
human control, and under the subordinate head of direct teleological phenomena,
stand the phenomena which result from the operation of the *social forces*, and
in this fact resides the entire possibility of an artificial social progress.
[-@ward_dynamic_1926 104]

Organization and altruism present a way out of the grim, Spencerian vision of
a social Darwinist universe that has defined many readings of literary
naturalism. Ward urges purposive and altruistic transformation of nature and
society alike through conscious guidance, rather than the assertion of
individual imperatives until that individual is halted by hard natural limits
(so-called "rational" action[^ln-hardin]).  But in order for this progress to
occur, human societies have to learn to transform themselves just like they
transform communities of other species. "That the same laws have operated in
the super-organic as in the organic world is quite obvious," he writes. "Not
only the progress out of barbarism into civilization, but the march of
civilization itself, has been attended with the same incidents that
characterize the development of a species or of an individual"
[-@ward_dynamic_1926 88]. He goes on to relate human wars and economic
struggles with the Hobbesian war of nature, but only as a way of calling for
a development into a more harmonious coexistence. The human is both the subject
and object of this teleological evolutionary paradigm, and altruistic
collective action is the mechanism of change.

[^ln-hardin]: "Rational" in a purely economistic sense, deriving from Adam
Smith, in which rationality means pursuing individual gain in all cases.
A well-known application of that form of "rational" action can be found in
Garret Hardin's famous essay, "The Tragedy of the Commons," in which the
rational herdsman is shown to deplete the common fields, to the ruination of
all, rather than cooperate with his neighbors [@hardin_tragedy_1964]. Elinor
Ostrom's Nobel-winning work on the managed commons refutes this view of
rationality in terms Ward would likely have appreciated
[@elinor_governing_1990]. Hardin would later revise his work to acknowledge the
possibility of a managed commons. See also [@nixon_neoliberalism_2009].


Herein lies the basis of Ward's influence on Gilman's ecological socialism:
nature's economy[^ln-worster-natures-economy] and the human economy are subject
to waste, because the latter is merely an extension of the former and because
they are both unsustainably competitive; the tasks of regulating human
exchanges and regulating natural exchanges are therefore unified under the
auspices of collective governance (if not the state, per se). Socialism
becomes, essentially, an ecological issue. Thus does Ward's lament for
environmental destruction, the passage that brought him into such close contact
to Marshian conservationism, slips into a critique of economic inequality:

> Labor and capital, whose dependence upon each other is absolute, are
constantly found in open hostility, which greatly reduces productiveness of
both. Exchange of products is largely carried on by redundant third parties,
who, through no fault of their own, are allowed to absorb the largest share of
the wealth produced.... Wealth is not only unequally but inequitably
distributed. In short, all the functions of society are performed in a sort of
chance way, which is precisely the reverse of economical, but wholly analogous
to the natural processes of the lower organic world. [-@ward_dynamic_1926 89]

Labor and capital are just one more battle in the war of all against all. Ward
does not quite go as far as naming capitalism as the cause of the environmental
destruction he decries above, but he puts the failures of unsustainable
development and the failures of labor relations down to the same essential lack
of "telic" refinement. Gilman would make the connection more explicit,
identifying capitalism's wasteful competition as the first thing to go in
a truly ecological society. Reinventing the way we understand labor is the
first step in her extrapolation.

[^ln-ward-gilman-scholarship]: See especially [@davis_his_2003] and
[@allen_overthrow_2004]. [Should probably include more; see Allen for more
sources on this]

[^ln-worster-natures-economy]: I borrow this phrase from Donald Worster's book
of the same name.

<!-- Necessary to return to good Anthropocene to drive home the relevance of
this context?-->

### The Garden, the Full World, and Ambient Labor

<!-- need to define/introduce full world concept (sources???)-->

Gilman develops Ward's nascent concept of an ecological socialism primarily
through the vehicle of the garden. For much of her life, Gilman kept a garden
of her own---a “vegetable garden mind you!, not merely flowers”---at one point
as a means of subsistence in the lean years of her later life, at another as
what she referred to as a “sanitarium” (*Selected Letters* 180, 281, 284). The
relevance of subsistence gardens to *Herland* is clear: in all its appearances
in the novel, the garden is a space that is simultaneously built and natural,
a source of food and material goods that is neither agricultural nor industrial
and yet is not entirely distinct from either. As an imagined society, Herland
also echoes the principles of containment and control inherent to her view of
gardening: it exists in a small and clearly demarcated space, and it is only
able to exist there by careful control over its elements and how they interact.
The society's chief concern is in maintaining this existence by managing what
we would now call its "ecological footprint"---or the amount of land required
to sustain the lifestyle of its population.[^ln-ecological-footprint] Unlike
the Ecomoderns, however, Gilman does not imagine a technological fix to the
conditions of scarcity that define Herland, or not exactly. She instead uses
the garden as a paradigm for the controlled interaction of Herland's economy,
ecology, and social structures, communally managed by Herlanders to achieve the
best possible lifestyle given their finite landmass and resources. In other
words, the "garden" paradigm combines the environmentalist's concern with
limits and the "good Anthropocene" commitment to make human control over the
environment as benign as possible for all organisms involved. 

[^ln-ecological-footprint]: Give examples here... Earth currently needs
something like 2.5 Earths, America needs so much, China needs so much, while
"undeveloped" countries use much less.

The tension between limitation and control is in part embodied in *Herland*'s
setting, which it quickly becomes clear is more than mere background. As do the
authors of many utopian novels, Gilman uses the physical world to (quite
literally) prepare the ground for the social arguments to come, prefiguring
those arguments in natural description and even using the landforms themselves
as vehicles for argument. She provides a conspicuously cartographical overview,
delivered as the three male protagonists view Herland from a biplane, hoping to
get “the lay of the land” before they descend (41). This vantage point allows
them to see in one glance the argument in the terrain, though they do not
recognize it as such. Gilman's own world construction is carefully controlled
to create the kind of "nature" that she is most interested in discussing,
anticipating the way Herlanders themselves will manipulate their physical
environment to achieve an ecological ideal.

The aspect of their ideal that is most obviously embodied in the physical space
of Herland is containment, enforced by severe natural boundaries. From above,
they see that the land is confined to a triangular “high-standing spur” rising
out of the “dark green sea of crowding forest” around it. The sense of
obstruction established by the imposing forest is reinforced on the far end by
“white-crowned peaks in the distance, themselves probably inaccessible”
[@gilman_herland_2012 41]. The bounds of Herland are clearly defined, and with
them the scope of the systems that define it. Their cultural and economic
isolation is assumed, as is their ecological sequestration. The natural
disaster that locks the Herlanders into a kind of natural terrarium also
prevents organisms outside this "high-standing spur" from interacting with life
outside of it---it must, as it is an apparently functional assumption the
Herlanders use in their ecological equations. To use a contemporary term, the
same factors that keep Herland off the map make it a distinct bioregion---a
term that implies autonomy and closure of both infrastructural and natural
physical features.[^bioregionalism]

[^ln-bioregionalism]: point to some research on bioregions, also show that it
is probably another fantasy in real life but works conceptually/in fiction

Gilman's organization of distinct types of natural space within these
boundaries emphasizes her narrative shaping of space as well as the extent of
Herlanders' environmental management. Each type of region occurs where it will
be most useful to the human inhabitants of Herland, though it is unclear how
much of this is the result of intentional influence and how much would be
considered "natural." Describing Herland from the boundaries in, Vandyck says,
“It appeared to be well forested about the edges, but in the interior there
were wide plains, and everywhere parklike meadows and open places”; in
addition, “closely cultivated gardens” mark the interior plains (42, 47). He
notes the presence of cities without giving a sense of their number or spatial
orientation, but there are indications later that similar small cities are
spread throughout the country.[^ln-small-cities] These cities seem to be the
organizing principle of the space, but not in the same pattern of development
that would create the metropolis and suburb in the real world. As one might
expect given the trend of integrating the built and natural environments, there
is not one single, sprawling urban center to Herland, nor the corresponding
separation of urban and rural divisions of labor. Instead, there appear to be
small towns in a loosely unified political relationship. For this loose
associative structure to work as a nationalized unit in the apparent absence of
any transportation technology, natural barriers in the interior have to be kept
to a minimum. The relegation of the forest to the edges of Herland, then, is
important both symbolically and practically. It maintains the marginality that
is part of the forest's essential cultural or symbolic character---it is still
as far from urban space as one is able to go---but in this case the careful
management also prevents the trees from impeding travel through the interior.
This practical function is underscored by the presence of “clean, well-built
roads,” the unhindered view from “the edge of the open country” through field
glasses, and the speed with which three Herlanders on foot are able to distance
themselves from the male intruders (42, 47). Open space is carefully preserved
in service of the infrastructural, visual, and physical links that unite the
disparate groups of Herlanders who seem to be clustered in semiautonomous urban
spaces. 

[^ln-small-cities]: See, for example, the men's lecture circuit
partway through the novel (109-11). 

This deliberate organization of the land into forest, open space, and urban
space subtly introduces the way the "garden" works as a spatial paradigm,
emphasizing containment, management, and a teleological understanding of space.
It presents a land that is constructed for a purpose, in contrast to actual
wilderness, which is both a détante of dueling survival instincts and a web of
interdependence---but wild either way. Here, in contrast, natural spaces are
reifications of perspectives on nature itself, which occur in the way that
interaction with the land occurs, and in this case, in the way in which the
land is shaped physically and narratively. 

<!--mark1-->

<!--### Inhabitation as Coevolution is this still in?-->

<!-- need a defining statement of how she changes the idea of inhabitation,
just as I need/worked on it for ambient labor--> 

[+Lukacs] "Inhabitation" is not a word that Gilman uses, but it describes
perfectly Herland's careful attention to requirements and modes of living. The
effects of human life on the immediate environment come into focus by making
inhabitation an object of inquiry, as Herlanders do and as Gilman did
throughout her body of work. But attention to forms of inhabitation also makes
those forms of inhabitation mutable. Under capitalism, inhabitation has
developed, notoriously, under the paradigm of the country and the city, with
the country's people and resources increasingly sapped to support industrial
development in the cities (discussed elsewhere in this work as a "metabolic
rift"[^ln-metabolic-rift-elsewhere]). Free from the determining influence of
market conditions, Herland is free to reimagine inhabitation just as it
reimagined labor. Similarly, what results is a greater degree of
sustainability, but it also introduces a degree of *guided coevolution* into
Herland's social ecology. The Hobbesian war of all against all, so essential to
Darwinian competition and its misapplications to social life, is deemphasized
in favor of interspecies cooperation---a paradigm no less evolutionarily
essential in nature, but less commonly cited in theories of social evolution.
And yet even this seemingly more palatable social application of evolutionary
theory presents major challenges to both human and environmental ethics that
any form of teleological progress towards a good Anthropocene will have to
address: challenges grounded in questions of consensus and control, of whose
*telos* is allowed to set the agenda of progress and how it comes to be
accepted.

[^ln-metabolic-rift-elsewhere]: See my chapter on Jack London. In short, the
metabolic rift is a widening disruption in the "metabolic" exchange of
nutrients between town and country....

Inhabitation does not come under scrutiny for its own sake in *Herland*, but as
a way of pursuing a teleological coevolution between the human and its
environment. An extension of Ward's theories of self-guided evolution, Gilman's
thinking on the ecological aspects of coevolution first become visible in an
article that she published in *Circle Magazine* in 1908, “Modern
Beatitudes---The Newness of the Earth.” Here she suggests that the earth and
the human species are both mere children, as yet relatively undeveloped but
constantly growing into balance with one another. The evolution of the human
race is framed here as a gradual accretion of understanding of the effects of
human activity on the earth---an understanding that has erupted as the
Anthropocene---coupled with a mass-adaptation based on that understanding.
After describing the gradual exhaustion of the earth’s resources by “our
present methods,” Gilman reassures us that the process will not continue to its
catastrophic conclusion, for we 

> are waking up in good earnest these days; ceasing to be a baby race, a set of
ignorant, selfish, short-sighted infants, madly quarreling with one another
over the fruits most easily gathered. We are young yet, but no longer mere
children; young with the splendid hope and courage of youth, but not with the
weakness and irresponsibility of infancy.…All we have to do is to apply
ourselves to study the conditions of life on earth, and learn to meet them.

Framing the evolution of the species in terms of the maturation of an
individual opens Framing puts evolution in the same model of self-guided progress that Ward's
theories lay out. As Gilman elaborates this system, humanity is saved by its
inevitable development into a wiser, gentler race. Progress is not social
Darwinist Herbert Spencer’s steady march from simplicity to complexity or
continued expansion to the edges of the Earth, ignoring all limits. It is
instead a renunciation of wastefulness and destructive behavior, which is to be
replaced by the more careful management of the natural environment. While
Gilman's ideal humanity is more subject to limits to growth than Ward's appears
to be, it is also more able to effect positive ecological change. With
anticipatory echoes of Herland and the Ecomoderns, she suggests that there “is
absolutely nothing prevent us from reforesting our hills, checking our floods,
preserving our soils, maintaining the balance of nature plus the art and skill
and learning of mankind.” The paradigm of the human struggling against the
natural world is replaced by the simultaneous development of both realms. By
framing this development in terms of the growth of the human species---and
indeed, of the planetary system as a whole---she defines her vision of
coevolution by an increase in the health of human and environment alike, not an
opposition to be resolved by conflict. Refinement of the human ecology replaces
dominance and expansion as the means by which humanity will thrive in "Modern
Beatitudes," just as development without growth would become the key to
sustenance in *Herland*.

<!-- this would be most useful to show, briefly, that the form this coevolution
takes is guided by subtle cultural/educational innovations; but may not be
necessary/evidence could be put in footnote to the claim.-->

Guided evolution, however, raises questions regarding the evolutionary
mechanism---this kind of guidance in a purely genetic understanding of
evolution would imply a system of eugenics that is not (at least not
explicitly) part of Gilman's system. Like Ward, she emphasizes environmental
influences over biological variation in evolution, forwarding a version of
Jean-Baptiste Lamarck's (now discredited) evolutionary theory rather than
a strictly Darwinian one. The legacy of these competing theories is imported
directly into the novel. In an exchange between Terry and the Herlander Zava,
for example, Terry refers to August Weissmann’s refutation of Jean-Baptiste
Lamarck,[^ln-ramsbeck] saying that “acquired traits are not transmittable.” The
response to this refutation identifies guided cultural development and
education as the mechanism of change, even if one were to concede a degree of
biological determination:

>“If that is so, then our improvement must be due either to mutation, or solely
to education,” [Zava] gravely pursued. “We certainly have improved. It may be that
all these higher qualities were latent in the original mother; that careful
education is bringing them out; and that our personal differences depend on
slight variations in prenatal condition.”

>“I think it is more in your accumulated culture,” Jeff suggested. “And in the
amazing psychic growth you have made.” (103)

<!-- backgrounding section: the dangers of the garden paradigm applied to human
ecologies--> 
But there ethical problems even within the anthropocentric frame of Gilman's
argument. The first is that "guided evolution" unavoidably introduces
the concept of eugenics, even with biological and genetic determination
deemphasized as it is in Gilman's understanding of evolution. These
implications would be hashed out by Gilman herself fifteen years after
*Herland*, in an unpublished (perhaps unpublishable) article called “Gardening
and the Baser Passions.” Though evidently an attempt at comedy---or so it
is described in a letter from Charlotte Barbour, one of Gilman’s editors at
Putnam, explaining that the essay would not be accepted by horticulture
journals (Barbour)---in such a grim context the effect is anything but. In
sharp contrast to a sentimental view of the garden parodied early in the
article, Gilman says that the main work of the gardener is not to plow, plant,
or harvest---rather, “his main business, his longdrawn incessant effort, is to
kill.” From this premise the rest of the essay describes the many and various
ways to kill as well as the necessity to “kill without ceasing” if the
gardener’s “plants are to live,” finally dissolving into a litany of the
many organisms detrimental to the gardener’s efforts. Carried directly into
*Herland* or any human context, this would foreshadow the most horrifying
ideologies of the years to come.

At least in *Herland*, however, that extension does not appear to have
occurred: even though the garden is the operative metaphor for Herland's human
inhabitants as well as its nonhuman ones, the presence of humans prevents
murder as a means of evolutionary guidance. Although, as Cynthia J. Davis
points out, it would be incorrect to suggest that none of the reprehensible and
often racist views that defined her conservative old age had developed when she
was writing *Herland*, it seems that not until “her later years” did “Gilman
[become] a decided proponent of eugenics” in the way she is if her essay on
gardening is to be taken as extending to the garden of her society (“His and
Herland” 82). Even then, the violence of her gardening essay never presents
itself. Indeed, a shift in the way she considers the *literal* garden is
documented in her correspondence well after the time of *Herland*. In a letter
to Alice Park on June 29th, 1928, some two years before the rejection of the
“Gardening” essay and thirteen years after *Herland*, Gilman writes: 

> All May the planning and planting, all June the weed-weed-Weeding. I’ve changed
my mind about the word “fighting” as applied to weed. If the desire to kill and
desperate efforts thereto, against the ceaseless pressure of an en-enemy
[*sic*], a million-headed enemy which rises up like Anteus is not a fight, what
is it? (*Selected Letters* 272)

Her acceptance of gardening as "fighting" in 1928 indicates that her position
prior to that point was a gentler (if willfully myopic) view of managed
growth---perhaps best defined by a metaphor of “planting” rather than
“weeding.” Though by no means a resolution to the novel’s eugenics problem (it
merely shifts to a different type of eugenics), this emphasis on traits that
are encouraged over those that are discouraged allows Gilman to avoid the overt
brutality that she would later embrace regarding literal gardening.
Accordingly, the role of the human as simultaneous producer and product of the
environment is more complicated as it appears in *Herland* than this later
depiction of the gardener's task.

[^ln-eugenics-criticism]: The topic of eugenics, along with the question of
race in Gilman more generally, has been a major and controversial topic of
Gilman scholarship. The initiating essay in this strand of criticism is Susan
S. Lanser’s 1989 essay “Feminist Criticism, ‘The Yellow Wallpaper,’ and the
Politics of Color in America,” which Jennifer L. Fleissner says has since
become “hegemonic” (Fleissner 95). Cynthia J. Davis provides a rigorous
historical and biographical context to eugenics in *Herland* in her essay on
Gilman and Lester F. Ward, “His and Herland.” In a somewhat different vein,
Fleissner urges a re-historicization of the eugenic conversation in terms of
middle-class women, nineteenth-century feminism, and the rise of a “therapeutic
culture” as it relates to race in America (92-5).

<!-- does this need to be right after the quote? --> At stake here are the
comparative roles of genetics and culture to evolutionary development. The
first sentence can be seen as weighing Darwinism against Lamarckism, but no
clear conclusion is reached. Zava presents a unique synthesis of biological and
environmental determinism in which everyone descended from the original
mother---that is, all Herlanders---contains dormant unrealized powers that only
careful nurture can bring out. In this possibility, prenatal *conditions*
(merely a hyper-localized environment) rather than primarily genetic makeup
determine the distinctions between individuals, with even "qualities that were
latent in the original mother" relying on external conditions to manifest. But
the evolutionary "environment" is not merely physical. We see in Jeff’s
suggestion that “culture” and communal “psychic growth” are just as important,
both of which are instilled by a process of targeted education. Gilman’s
version of evolution thus relies on a complex interrelation between three
elements: genetic inheritance, environmental influence, and education. Here and
throughout the novel, none of these elements becomes central enough to be seen
as a mechanistic determinant; the exploration of each must necessarily take
place in terms of its interaction with the others.

[^ln-ramsbeck]: See Beth Sutton-Ramsbeck’s note on on the passage in *Herland
and Related Writings* (103 n.1).

<!-- pick up here -->


<!-- Domestic versus Ambient Labor-->

To Gilman, then, guided coevolution means guidance of the environmental and
cultural conditions in order to make human activity and the rest of the ecology
become more mutually supporting. Ambient labor is part of this equation, in
that making the environment itself the object of labor makes ecological
despoliation contrary to the aims of human activity. But labor is not the only
interaction with environment. Gilman presents a form of inhabitation in which
she revises distinctions between the home and the world, interior and exterior,
and the attendant modes of interacting with space. When the natural world is
treated as though it were a home, human and environment become expressions of
each other, mutually dependent and evolutionarily bound.

This reevaluation of inhabitation developed first in Gilman's economic writing,
in which she was less concerned with the state of the planet than with the
economic status of domestic labor. Throughout her career, she sharply
criticized the relegation of women to the domestic sphere and the exploitation
inherent in domestic labor;[^ln-gilman-on-domestic-labor] among the most
programmatic of the results was her campaign for the kitchenless household. In
*Women and Economics*, she argues that “change in the economic position of
woman from dependence to independence must bring with it a rearrangement of
these home interests and industries” (224). Thus, she lays out a vision of
“apartments…without kitchens” except those “belonging to the house from which
meals could be served to the families in their rooms or in a common
dining-room,” hoping thereby to liberate the “hundreds of thousands of women in
New York City alone who are wage-earners, and who also have families”
(242-3).[^ln-domestic-labor-refs] 

Gilman carried her thoughts on domestic reform directly into her ecological
thinking in *Herland*. In a passage that could be taken right from
a kitchenless household pamphlet, Van says, “For food we either went to any
convenient eating-house, ordered a meal brought in, or took it with us to the
woods, always and equally good” (144). This might seem like a departure from
the ambient labor paradigm that marks most of *Herland*, and indeed, it does
imply the existence of jobs that are not directly engaged in environmental
production---preparing and delivering food for restaurant-goers seems almost
modern, despite not being wage-labor. Maintaining these communal eating houses,
however, although it is not discussed directly, would bring food consumption
into the larger, self-sustaining system of Herland as a whole. Making cooking
and eating a public, shared activity reduces material waste and makes it
possible to manage entirely the waste that *is* produced---and since we know
soil health is of chief concern to Herlanders, we can assume that the nutrients
in human and food waste are returned to circulation. Herland's communal
kitchens would thus fertilize the soil that in turn produces the material that
those kitchens and their dependents need to survive. The stated goal of
Gilman’s domestic reform---of incorporating domestic labor into the sphere of
the economy by opening it to division of
labor[^ln-division-labor-refs]---becomes in *Herland* an incorporation of
domestic labor into ecological management. In this ecological garden economy,
environmental production *is* that economized version of domesticity.

[^ln-gilman-on-domestic-labor]: See especially *Women and Economics*, *The
Home: Its Work and Influence*, and “The Waste of Private Housekeeping.” For the
wider context of domestic reform in Gilman’s work and in the context of the
early twentieth century, see Yvonne Gaudelieus’s “Kitchenless Houses and Homes:
Charlotte Perkins Gilman and the Reform of Architectural Space,” Polly Wynn
Allen’s *Building Domestic Liberty*, and Dolores Hayden’s “Two Utopian
Feminists and Their Campaigns for Kitchenless Houses.”

[^ln-domestic-labor-refs]: See also Allen’s *Building Domestic Liberty*: “By
the middle of the nineteenth century, roughly one-third of American women
entered the paid labor force on a temporary basis, usually until they married.
Only the poorest women---immigrants, widows, and free blacks---engaged in a
lifelong effort to make ends meet financially by working outside of their
homes” (12). See also Chang, especially 323-4; and Fusco 420-1.

These communal kitchens are characteristic of all domestic space in Herland:
made public and brought into a continuum with the environment beyond it.
Permeating borders between interior and exterior space, the garden model of
society delineates a vision of a productive home as the spatial equivalent of
ambient labor. The complicated lines of home and world are born out by
a conversation between Terry, the mouthpiece of domestic imprisonment, and
Jeff, the character who eventually becomes a male Herlander and appears to
speak the Herland party line: 

> “*Home!*” [Terry] sneered. “There isn’t a home in the whole pitiful place.”

> “There isn’t anything else, and you know it,” Jeff retorted hotly. (121)

In Jeff’s explanation, “home” means so much that it has, to Terry, effectively
become meaningless. By staging this argument, Gilman narrates the ambiguous
domesticity that results when the entire world is one's "home." If foresting is
both the base of the Herland economy and part of making dinner, can it be
called housework? If the kitchen and pantry circumscribe the world and all
labor, is everything housework? The rhetorical question that Gilman repeatedly
included in lectures to women’s clubs becomes paramount: “Shall the home be our
world? or the world our home?” (qtd. in Allen 18). The imprisonment implicit in
the first of Gilman’s options---“the home be[ing] our world”---is based on the
exclusion of domestic space from the systems beyond it. But taking the “world
[as] our home” implies an application of a domestic paradigm of labor to
a larger system.[^ln-expanding-domestic] Jennifer Fleissner has argued that
*Herland* is an attempt to resolve the former paradigm, domesticity as
imprisonment, which is so memorably depicted in "The Yellow Wallpaper." Whereas
this early short story contains the image of a *walled* garden and links the
labor of ordering to mental collapse, this very same ordering become the cure
to that madness when women and the home comprise the entire world
[@fleissner_women_2004 87, 95]. Considering world-as-home in the context of
Gilman's broader environmental insights, it becomes clear that this
reevaluation of the home and inhabitation is also part of achieving a greater
ecological maturity, aligning human activity with ecosystem health.

This ecological maturity and the new concepts that comprise it do not arise
randomly, however. Education forms the final piece of Gilman's coevolutionary
system and is the means by which it is developed and maintain across
generations, allowing individual social and cultural adaptations to the
environment to accrue over time.[^ln-simone] The Herlanders model and reinforce
the dialectic with environment through a ludic system of education that is just
as ambient as their system of labor. When asked about Herland schools, the
Herlander Somel says, “With the babies…we first provide an environment which
feeds the mind without tiring it…. But as early as possible…we provide choices,
simple choices, with very obvious causes and consequences” (128). The system of
education graduates from an accretion of environmental understanding to the
gradual realization that human action affects that environment, just as Gilman
describes in “Modern Beatitudes.” 

[^ln-simone]: For a broader view of gilman’s interest in education reform, see
Deborah M. De Simone’s “Charlotte Perkins Gilman and Educational Reform.”

<!-- why bother with games? What's the point here? Is it just more ambient
labor stuff?-->Moreover, the second stage of education is achieved through *games* that
“develop the faculties [they] wish to encourage.” Games are shown to be
foundations of pedagogy---and, thus, social determinants---in the incident near
the beginning of the novel in which the men’s escape attempt is interrupted by
an invitation to play. Three Herlanders set up a pile of stones with a yellow
nut on top, and invite the men to throw stones at the pile. They fail miserably
until “Jeff succeed[s] in bringing the whole structure to the ground. It took
me [Van] still longer, and Terry, to his intense annoyance, came third.”
Experience of the pedagogic built environment is followed by swift instruction
and the presentation of an alternative method:

> Then Celis set up the little tripod again, and looked back at us, knocking it
down, pointing at it, and shaking her short curls severely. “No,” [Celis] said.
“Bad---wrong!”…Then she set it up once more, put the fat nut on top, and
returned to the others; and there those aggravating girls sat and took turns
throwing little stones at that thing, while one stayed by as a setter-up; and
they just popped that nut off, two times out of three, without upsetting the
sticks. (69)

The contrast between the two performances is severalfold. The men’s idea of
victory, for which they are reprimanded, destroys the entire tower; the women
strike only what they mean to, with minimal disruption to the larger structure.
The men compete against each other and against the women, sulking when they
lose and becoming divided; the women cooperate for the most efficient group
performance, systematizing the resetting of the structure and taking turns, and
their performance is described not according to the relative success of the
members but according to their aggregate success rate. The difference between
the two types of competition is the difference between boxing and a boat race:
success of the individual in the men’s group leads to the failure of the rest
of the group, while the success of a single Herlander contributes to communal
benefit. The competitive tendencies of the men destroy the waste time and
energy, in contrast with the precise and cooperative systems of the women,
which culminate in a system of cyclical and effortless play. This basic
structure describes the Herland school system, which becomes at the higher
levels a system of ecological instruction. (Recall the “forester” passage
discussed in the introduction: Ellador’s interactions with insects are guided
by a “bug teacher,” and this guidance leads her to forestry.) Education in
Herland discourages tendencies like competition, which disrupt the managed
ecology of the garden, while it reinforces the gardener’s mentality of cyclical
action and cooperative development. Social evolution brings the development of
society into line with the development of the environment, managing the
material interchange of human and nature.




<!--mark2-->

<!-- transition from control-limitation/world-construction subsection to
economy/ambient labor section-->

<!--It is hard to maintain, however, any distinction of "perspectives on nature"
from perspectives on human economic and social systems in Herland. It would be
more accurate to say that these carefully shaped landscapes embody *Herland*'s
understanding of the web of mutual determination that always unites human and
nonhuman systems, but does so especially clearly here. Understanding this
interdependence causes Herlanders to transform their system of labor and
economics as well as their physical landscape, and these combined
transformations allow them to survive the problems of a full world with scarce
resources. -->

### Ambient Labor 

<!-- need intro foregrounding labor itself and stating its argument in terms of
the work she is doing-->Thinking about Herland through an economic lens is an
especially clear way to demonstrate this interdependence, precisely because
doing so is so difficult: normal economic categories fail to describe the
system, and new ones are required. The meaning of "labor" in a world without
money is always going to be ambiguous, but here the blending between economic,
ecological, and social structures adds an additional level of difficulty. The
wholesale transition of Herland's natural environment to an orderly progression
of ecological zones appears to have happened through a process that shares the
characteristics of a natural ecological progression (with humans included in
the ecology, of course), of a massive public works project, and of
transformations in the social understanding of individuals and communities. The
way these elements come together is particularly clear when the Herlander
Ellador describes the process of becoming a forester:

> “It was a butterfly that made me a forester,” said Ellador. “I was about eleven
years old, and I found a big purple and green butterfly on a low flower. I
caught it, very carefully, by the closed wings, as I had been told to do, and
carried it to the nearest insect teacher---” (I [Vandyck] made a note there to
ask her what on earth an insect teacher was) “to ask her its name. She took it
from me with a little cry of delight. ‘Oh, you blessed child…. This is a female
of the obernut moth,’ she told me, ‘they are almost gone. We have been trying
to exterminate them for centuries. If you had not caught this one, it might
have laid eggs enough to raise worms enough to destroy thousands of our nut
trees---thousands of bushels of nuts,---and make years and years of trouble for
us.’…I grew a foot, it seemed to me, and determined then and there to be a
forester.” (123)

On the narrative level, this passage sets up, and then reverses, an expectation
of conservation, disclosing instead an ideology of environmental management
more typical of forestry.[^ln-forestry] The tender, careful handling of the
frail creature will ultimately culminate, we realize, in the its death, as well
as the last stage in a deliberate extinction of the entire species. This
reversal effectively replaces uncomplicated reverence for the "natural world"
with a commitment to transform the “natural” into the system that most benefits
humans (and also the fictional obernut tree, if only incidentally).
Understanding that the obernut moth limits the propagation of the obernut, and
realizing that the obernut is Herland’s “best food-nut,” they create
a situation in which nurturing the environment they have crafted will mean
nurturing themselves (123). 

Of course, this type of ecological management also contains some of the basic
problems of a Herland forestry more broadly conceived, problems that fall along
the same lines as the ethical and material complaints leveled at proponents of
the good Anthropocene. The Herlanders hardly seem to blink at the forced
extinction of a species for the benefit of the human Herlanders, even though
there will be no other obernut moth in the world as they know it---recalling
Crist's rebuttal to the Ecomoderns, "mass extinction does not have a technical
solution" (247). Furthermore, this action would violate the deep ecologist's
fundamental ethical axiom: that there is an inherent value in every living
thing, regardless of its value as a resource. It also presumes perfect
knowledge of what will happen when the obernut moth is exterminated,
a manageable equation in the novel but one that could have unpredictable
consequences in any real-world setting---in fact, considering this scenario as
though it were real, an overabundance of the obernut moth could well have been
an unintended result of another act of "control."[^ln-management-disaster] Part
of the fiction here is that perfect knowledge and absolute control over an
ecology are even possible.

They do not brave this shaky ethical ground out of a pursuit of wealth or
profit, however. Herlanders are intervening in an attempt to protect the
highest-yield form of food, protecting their own survival as a species. As is
common in utopian novels since Thomas More, money is the first thing to be
eliminated in Gilman's imagined society, and with it goes any thought of
accumulation or excess. The object of labor is always a more stable and
comfortable means of survival within their regional ecology, as opposed to
profit-motivated industrial agriculture, which places the effects of human
labor beyond the reach of any but the most direct ecological ramifications. The
Herlanders are the managers of this ecology, but with the recognition that they
are also part of it; they are both variables in the equation and the
mathematicians who are solving it, the gardeners and part of the garden.

[^ln-forestry]: Forestry from Leopold, Merchant

[^ln-management-disaster]: cite the thing about wolves in Yellowstone... This
is Teddy Roosevelt's whole idea of game management, namely you eliminate the
other apex predators so you can have all the critters for yourself. But this
has outrageous downstream consequences, like rivers rerouting, erosion, etc.

Even the social norms and structures in Herland result from the ecological
roles played by the Herlanders, individually and collectively. In the forester
Ellador's story of the obernut moth, she is narrating her formation of
a professional identity---the moment when she conceives of herself in terms of
her role in the economy. But the nature of the "work" in Herland is such that
this moment is inseparable from the realization of her place in the *ecology*,
as a conscious limiting factor of the obernut moth in this case, and probably
of other species in the future. Ellador becomes more of a directed ecological
force than a laborer. Considered in terms of labor, a “forester” such as
Ellador would be a peculiar entity: she is not quite an agricultural producer,
and yet her actions contribute to the sufficient supply of food. She is not
exactly employed by the state, as a forester in our world would be, and yet her
function to the community is clear. Her duties are framed in terms of
maintaining the environment, and yet in doing so she is also maintaining
herself---both materially, by providing food for herself and others, and
psychologically, by coming into her identity. In this ambiguous form of labor,
the social, economic, and ecological place of the individual come together in
ways that make them difficult to distinguish.[^ln-ambient-labor-preview]

[^ln-ambient-labor-preview]: This concept will be elaborated further in the
"Ambient Labor" section below.


Though not every Herlander is a forester, Ellador is an example of
labor in general as it exists in Herland. The functions that labor fills are
beyond a system of wages or commodity production. There is no mention of the
working day (a pronounced break from utopian tradition). Though there are
functions like communal eating houses and physical structures that, presumably,
need to be built and maintained, all these things are part of an environmental 
sustenance that satisfies basic needs and improves the quality of the *systems*
that define communal health and quality of life. 

Taken together, these examples of *work* in *Herland* add up to a type of labor
unlike others that have come before it, which I will call "ambient labor."
Ambient labor produces the *environment itself* and the systems that make it up
rather than commodities themselves. Ambient labor is also a *part* of the
environment in itself, fading into the background of both life and narration.
It differs from other forms of labor in that it is a total system, voluntary,
and divorced from the production of commodities and exchange. But, crucially,
it anticipates some aspects of the contemporary field of ecological economics
by including the biological functions of humans as ecological services on par
with those provided by plants and animals (e.g. absorbing carbon and producing
oxygen in the case of plants or fertilizing soil and transporting seeds in the
case of animals). 

<!-- ambient labor section-->

Gilman does not theorize Herland's form of labor directly, but the ambient
labor system can be inferred from what she does show us of the economy and the
roles within it. There seems to be no rigid allocation of tasks, for everyone
in some sense is working on the same thing---again, on Herland itself. Everyone
finds their way to a task according to their inclination, like Ellador does,
and all of these tasks are understood according to their influence on the
material and social ecology. The labor's own "ambience," then, is a product of
its focus on everything else that is ambient rather than a focused economic
goal for individual gain. When they work, they work *on* the land, and not just
in the locative sense: it is the object and product of their labor, both raw
material and product, rather than a mere uncounted resource in the production
of a commodity. Further, working on the land in this way is their means of
working on themselves as a society, making changes to the social and economic
structure by transforming their environment. As a whole, these subtle changes
institute a new paradigm for both sides of the economic equation (production
and consumption). Instead of a market cycle or the capitalist working day,
a state of ambient production and consumption governs the rhythms of
Herland.[^ln-ambience-morton]

[^ln-ambience-morton]: really do need to talk about Timothy Morton here,
"Ecology without Nature".

Evidence of ambient labor is to be found in the setting itself and the way in
which it is "cultivated"---it is never the single crop that is the object of
labor, but the entire system.[^ln-producing-systems] The combination of
ubiquity and gentleness in this systemic intervention means there is no purely
built or purely natural environment, but only the liminal space between the
produced and the wild. Nowhere is this contrast of cultivated natural space
with actual wildness more evident than within the forest itself, where it is
underscored by the voiced amazement of the three male outsiders. In Vandyck’s
initial impressions, he points out with astonishment that “even the forests
looked as if they were cared for” (42). Later, Terry says, “I never saw
a forest so petted, even in Germany. Look, there’s not a dead bough---the vines
are trained---actually!...[The trees are f]ood-bearing, practically all of
them.... The rest splendid hard-wood. Call this a forest? It's a truck farm!”
(44). The word “cultivated” is repeated many times with reference to every
aspect of the landscape, flora and fauna alike, as well as the tiny gardens
that dot the open plains---at one point the forests are referred to simply as
“the cultivated area” (66). The forested area is not the tangled thicket,
wilderness embodied, as it is in the world beyond. It is instead the
breadbasket of the rest of the country, or as Terry puts it, a "truck farm."
This term, now slightly archaic, indicates by definition produce grown for
non-commercial purposes, via definitions of “truck” as bartered (and thus
non-market) goods (“truck,” *OED*). But it is also not an exploitative model of
agricultural development, as is evident from the words used to describe the
actual interventions on the part of human Herlanders. The forests are not
planted or culled but "petted," or indulged in their natural growth and
proliferation; similarly, the vines are "trained," a term of domestication but
not exploitation. The agricultural system encompasses the economic system, not
the other way around.

<!-- worth checking in with Anthropocene stuff here? Could say 'this is
important cuz some people say the Anthropocene should begin with agriculture;
revising agricultural methods is therefore one way of asserting control over
anthropogenic transformation; maybe after ambient labor section-->

[^ln-producing-systems]: See Katherine Fusco, "Systems, Not Men: Producing
People in Charlotte Perkins Gilman’s *Herland*" for a similar argument about
the reproductive part of this process.

Of course, decentralizing economic gain disrupts the terms normally used to
discuss production. To produce the environment, and only the environment, is
difficult to separate from a routine, agricultural planting of crops. The
difference is severalfold. In the first place, anything outside of
a microeconomic equation of valuable inputs and outputs is considered an
"externality"---at most effluvium or part of the margin for error. For example,
worker health, ecological impacts, or downstream effects of the thing produced
(such as its disposal or impact on its consumers) only come under economic
consideration when it can be expressed as a change in the cost of labor or
fines levied for pollution. In Herland's ambient labor, the "equation" is
composed entirely of the environmental health factors and downstream effects
that are forcibly excluded from the consideration of classical economics. 

Furthermore, Herlanders cultivate food-bearing plants that go well beyond what
will be harvested, leaving plenty for the support of the non-human members of
the ecosystem and the natural propagation of the plants in question. In other
words, Herland labor is in pursuit of something like what we would now call
permaculture. When Vandyck learns more about the cultivation that constitutes
“foresting," he sees that they have replaced planting of produce with the
creation of a desirable environment entire. In some cases it has led to “the
deliberate replanting of an entire forest area with different kinds of
trees”---an unimaginably vast displacement that nevertheless results in
a functioning ecosystem, and one that, with respect to the needs of the Herland
people, has been improved (104). Like Ward, Gilman exhibits a fixation on
a teleological guidance of natural systems to produce an environment that is
both robust and oriented toward the sustenance of humanity. But rather than
replacing natural systems with human systems in the name of "improvement," the
Herlanders hope to improve both by integrating them, creating ecological
balance in a system that includes the built environment as well as natural
space. 

Unlike an "improvement" measured in economic output, Herland's is measured in
ecological effects. The way their built and natural environments relate can be
deduced by the absence, in Herland's development, of the most invasive
developments of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.[^ln-shishin] The
lack of industrialization, for one, implies that their waste material will be
of a kind that can return to the cycles from which it came. Most of the
byproducts of their production can probably just be composted, as we can see
from the attention given to soil conditions. Gilman specifies that “an
increasingly valuable soil [is] built, instead of the progressive
impoverishment so often seen in the rest of the world” (105). The development
of the environment is allowed to proceed without direct human activity, but the
conditions are set such that this natural development adheres to a desirable
course. The environment that determines this growth (the soil) is altered so
that development is both bolstered and guided by the combination of Herland’s
natural and built environments. As a result, the only necessary human
intervention is too incidental to be understood as labor in a traditional
sense---as is the case for Ellador, the forester discussed in the introduction.
In the case of the production of soil, the main place of intervention would be
in byproducts of consumption---compostable scraps and human excrement---which
come with necessary vital processes. Composting and waste management are
defined by systemic interventions that either leverage or strategically prevent
the natural activity of the ecosystem's organisms. Instead of understanding
production on the level of the product, they produce process; where the rapidly
industrializing society of 1915 America was defined by systems of production,
Gilman's alternative opts for the production of systems.[^ln-fusco]

The Herlanders' bodies themselves become one more ambient system in these
nested systems of ecological production, which is also to say that they are
part of the economy of ambient labor. As she does more directly elsewhere in
nonfiction writings like *Women and Economics* (1898), in *Herland* Gilman
defines motherhood as an *economically* valuable contribution to the
collective, which would be either impossible or ethically complicated in
a commodity-based economy (for offspring would necessarily be commodified).
Motherhood is also, as is crucial in her system, depersonalized, and is
therefore subject to division of labor just like every other economic
activity.[^ln-systems-prior] When a division of economic labor is expanded to
include ecology, taking into account what an ecological economist might call
ecological services, incorporating human reproduction into the economic
division of labor also subsumes it into the managed regional ecology. In this
context, the magical, parthenogenetic reproductive capacity is explicable less
as a product of divine intervention than as an extension of the garden economy,
a speculative conceit that puts human biological processes on the same level as
those of domesticated plants and animals. Reproduction in the desired
proportions takes on the same inevitability and automatism of production,
becoming a feature of carefully (and communally) controlled conditions rather
than a sum of uncoordinated individual choice---with the same worrying ethical
implications of any attempt to control human reproduction.

[^ln-systems-prior]: This aspect of the novel has been much discussed in Gilman
scholarship, as has the understanding of motherhood as an ecological and
systemic process. See Alex Shishin’s “Gender and Industry in Herland,”
Katherine Fusco’s “Systems, Not Men: Producing People in *Herland*,” and K.
Graehme Hall’s “Mothers and Children: ‘Rising with the Restless Tide’ in
*Herland*.”

[^ln-fusco]: For more on systems as a paradigm of production, personhood, and
society in *Herland*, and more specifically the relevance of Frederick Winslow
Taylor's *The Principles of Scientific Management*, @fusco_systems_2009.

[^ln-shishin]: Alex Shishin also investigates Herland's form of production,
with a different but related set of conclusions: “If such an industrial base
exists in Herland, we do not see it, nor hear or smell it. The same pleasant
condition---a pronounced lack of industrial pollution and ugliness---is present
in the two seminal utopian novels which preceded Herland: Edward Bellamy's
*Looking Backward* (1888) and William Morris's *News from Nowhere* (1890). But
while Bellamy and Morris offer explanations for this, Gilman does not” (“Gender
and Industry in *Herland*" 101). 

In narrative context, then, Gilman's idealistic and utopian model is simply
a hyper-rational response to extreme scarcity, and the first thing to go is
capitalism. The exclusive localism and closed-system dynamics that seem most
relevant to the Anthropocene are forced on the Herlanders so suddenly that they
are almost extinguished, and in these conditions, the market system fails. The
system of cultivation through ambient labor that the Herlanders develop instead
is therefore a means of subsistence without resorting to a market-based
distribution of goods that they recognize will always outgrow its container.
Herland begins in conditions of scarcity but attains, under the guidance of
a developing ambient labor and its cultural support system, the conditions of
post-scarcity. Persisting in a full world requires an economics of *usefulness*
like the one that defines Herland forestry, but only the low-impact
intervention of ambient labor has allowed the Herlanders to flourish on
a “little shut-in piece of land where one would have thought an ordinary people
would have been starved out long ago or reduced to an annual struggle for life”
(104). The non-market interaction of cultivation and wildness has lifted the
Herlanders out of simple necessity, making plenty and freedom from scarcity
a constitutive element of the environment itself.[^ln-wilderness-scarcity]

[^ln-wilderness-scarcity]: Li-Wen Chang also notes this peculiar character of
the wilderness, saying that “nature and culture nurture each other” in the
Gilman’s environment. Through a reading of Leo Marx’s *The Machine in the
Garden* (1964), she argues that Herland constitutes a “‘middle landscape’…where
machine meets landscape, where the two opposing forces, technological and
pastoral, contact and compromise which each other” (343). In a similarly
technological reading, Katherine Fusco argues in “Systems, Not Men: Producing
People in Charlotte Perkins Gilman’s *Herland*” that “Gilman dissolves the
distinction between biological and mechanical reproduction through her
insistence that the proper way to understand a person is as both product and
part of a system” (427).


Production is only one half of the economic equation, however, and arguably not
the most pressing one in the context of the full world. The Herlanders'
relationship to their environment also changes the nature of consumption, which
becomes as unfocused and free from market logic as production. The way this
peculiar coexistence of the managed and the natural affects consumption
patterns is revealed during the men's attempt to escape captivity. On the run,
Vandyck experiences consumption in a post-money, post-scarcity environment,
saying, “Mighty lucky it was that we could live off the country as we did. Even
that margin of forest seemed rich in food-stuffs” (67). The land itself has
become a kind of pantry without ceasing to be an exterior space. Consumption in
Herland is rendered as an interaction with “the country,” but the possibility
of “liv[ing] off” it does not constitute an achievement as it might in
a survivalist wilderness adventure. Instead, the land provides. 

Consumption fades into the background as a result, in the world of the novel as
well as narratively. Plentiful access to resources leaves the act of
consumption largely un-narrated throughout. In other naturalist novels,
commodities and their consumption become indicators of one's place in the money
economy and, therefore, the capitalist social structure, resulting in litanies
of goods and prices. Lily Bart's main relationship to plant life is in striving
to keep "fresh flowers for luncheon...jonquils or lilies-of-the-valley," and
her family's inability to provide the "two dollars a dozen" to do so is used
early in the novel to mark their fall from financial grace [@wharton_house_1990
27]. Clyde of Dreiser's *An American Tragedy* muses "that if only he had
a better collar" he would enter the milieu of those more happy and successful,
that to be one of them meant "that you possessed all of these luxuries" and
"went how, where, and when you pleased" (13, 43). Except for the passing
reference to the "obernut" in Ellador's tale of professional identification and
a few moments when Vandyck mentions stopping by a communal eating house on his
way to the forest, Gilman hardly describes the presumably unique products of
this foreign ecosystem,  and the only time clothes come up is when the
Herlanders supply them with a "thicker variety of union suit" (55). The
eliding, collective reference to "food-stuffs" is paradigmatic of her
references to food in general: it is never more than a category, an acknowledge
but unfetishized necessity. In Herland one seems to *find* food without
searching for it, eliminating in the same stroke the array of choices that
defines consumerism and the struggle to attain sustenance that defines
Darwinian notions of survival. This is the sense in which consumption in
*Herland* is "ambient." Vandyck's easy "liv[ing] off the country" sets the tone
for all references to consumption in *Herland*---the depiction of plenty
without waste, of the immediate satisfaction of wants by goods that are always
already at hand, recurs throughout.

<!-- bring in other forms of labor to compare -->Classical economics fails to
describe Herland's ambient labor, then: the ambient paradigm of production
frees Herlanders from commodity production and the exploitative traps inherent
in commodity-based consumption, wrecking the category as we know it. The
best-known critique of classical economics, that of Karl Marx, also fails to
encapsulate it, but the concept comes into further focus by comparison with the
labor theory of value (a theory that Gilman was not more than passingly
familiar with but was central to the socialism of other naturalist authors,
especially Jack London).[^ln-jack-london-socialism] In the labor theory of
value, commodities are a crystalized form of the labor that produced them, with
their value measured in the "socially necessary labor time" required for each.
This value is normally split into "exchange-value" and "use-value," but of
course, exchange is not part of the Herland economy. This leaves only
use-value. But as use-value either stays constant or increases (with increased
nutrient content of food, for example), the "socially necessary labor time" to
produce them decreases, at least for humans, because the system is increasingly
self-perpetuating and stable.[^ln-8-9-capital] That it is self-perpetuating
means that the amount of work needed for their sustenance is constantly
diminishing, as they go from setting up the ecology to making Ellador-like
tweaks, which happen incidentally. The goal of labor is always the reduction of
further labor rather than the increase of profitability. Past this point, the
entire economy---which here, in the absence of a market, consists only of the
production of use value[^ln-use-value]---is subsumed by the exchange of energy
and material that defines the Herland ecology. 

[^ln-8-9-capital]: See chapters eight and nine and the first section of chapter
ten of *Capital* volume one (133-151).

[^ln-use-value]: On use value and labor, see John Bellamy Foster: “Marx
[wrote] in his *Economic Manuscript of 1861-63* that ‘actual labour is the
appropriation of nature for the satisfaction of human needs….’ It followed that
the actual activity of labor was never independent of nature’s own
wealth-creating potential, ‘since material wealth, the world of use values,
exclusively consists of natural materials modified by labour’” (157). To the
extent that labor does exist in Herland, it appears to take this form
exclusively, except that the modification takes as its product ecological
systems rather than commodities.

[^ln-jack-london-socialism]: On Jack London's socialism and reading of Marx,
see [@raskin_jack_2005].

With both production and consumption becoming incorporated into part of the
larger environment, the processes enter a different sort of relationship with
each other than the one that characterizes, for example, supply and demand. The
relationship that results comes into particular focus in the context of
Gilman's other attempts to address this problem, albeit by different means.
Walter Benn Michaels, in his reading of “The Yellow Wallpaper,” describes
a system that is in many ways a market version of the Herland garden economy;
many of the problems he points out in "The Yellow Wallpaper" are resolved in
*Herland* by the removal of the market entirely. Michaels argues that in “The
Yellow Wallpaper,” published in 1892, the woman’s body becomes a site
“simultaneously of production and consumption…rewritten as the utopian body of
the market economy” in which “products not only exist to be consumed, but
coming into existence they already are consumed.” The simultaneous buying and
selling, producing and consuming of the self is conditional to *owning* that
self, making “exchange…the condition of [one’s] existence.” This “triumphant
omnipresence of market relations” is, for Michaels, the cause of the
character’s nervous breakdown: the narrator’s “marking” the yellow wallpaper
that is the object of her constant, compulsive meditation, and simultaneously
being “marked” by it in turn both indicates the logic of the market economy and
is the main feature of the narrator's madness (*The Gold Standard* 13). The
system depicted in *Herland* shares this simultaneity and omnipresence of
production and consumption---but it exists without market relations and,
consequently, without breakdown. Replacing economic exchange into ecological
exchange and replacing wage labor with ambient labor turns the conditions of
a collapse into the conditions of an ecotopian ideal. Without a market economy
in which the product is always “already consumed,” goods are always already
produced *and* consumed: consumption exists in complex interrelation with
production as part of the ecology. 

The reproduction of one's own labor through self-sustenance, as the means by
which this simultaneous production and consumption occurs, is sufficient
contribution to the Herland ecology---and as such, it is a Herlander’s only
economic obligation. Ecology is a mutuality of being, an involuntary
interrelation of organisms that requires of them only that they survive:
therefore, when ecology replaces market relations, living is the only “socially
necessary” labor. With *Herland*, Gilman uses the production of environment,
which occurs almost entirely as a concomitant of living, to envision an
assimilation of the vital processes into the ecology-driven economy; this frees
the vital processes from the reliance on an external economy that Michaels
describes, stabilizing it against disruption from without. Environmental
production provides Herlanders with freedom from market exploitation and makes
the welfare of the individual subject essential to the health of the system
that contains it.

<!-- term presents itself: a just distribution of biopower -->

Of course, saying that Gilman splits from economics entirely would not be
strictly true. Rather, she splits from any economics existing in 1915. From our
vantage point a century later, it would be more accurate to say that she has
imagined life in a world that implicitly anticipates ecological economics.
According to Joan Martinez-Alier, ecological economics 

> sees the economy not as a circuit or spiral of exchange value,
a merry-go-round of producers and consumers, but instead as an entropic flow of
energy and materials that runs through the economy. An economic history
...inspired by ecological economics would study, for example, the energy
systems of humanity. (173)

A "reproductive approach" to ecological economics "studies the social,
temporal, and spatial conditions under which the economy (which absorbs
resources and excretes residues) is encased within the evolving ecosystems"
(173). These descriptions of ecological economics would serve just as well as
blurbs for *Herland* from an ecological perspective. And yet, texts included in
surveys of ecological economics do not usually predate the 1970s, and are more
commonly from the 1980s and on (Shmelev 3-8). It required more hindsight,
generally speaking, to formulate an ecological economic system that could act
as 

> a response to the pressing environmental problems of the twentieth century
and the inability of neoclassical economic theory to solve them or provide
adequate explanations for the unprecedented decline in biodiversity, the
changing climate, increased generation of waste, all caused by the pursuit of
economic growth. (Shmelev 3)

Gilman should then be considered as an intellectual precursor to this economic
formulation of a response to the conditions that are now known as the
Anthropocene, and more generally result from the problems of a full
world.[^ln-martinez-alier-ee-precursors]

[^ln-martinez-alier-ee-precursors]: Most of the other precursors to ecological
economics were occupied with the question of how to unite the laws of
thermodynamics with economic and sociological laws. Martinez-Alier and John
Bellamy Foster cite Sergei Podolinsky as an early pioneer in this area, in part
because he was a correspondent of Marx and Engels. [@guha_varieties_1997 172,
@foster_marxs_2000]

<!-- end old ambient labor section -->

Ambient labor is a cornerstone of Herland's ability to create a truly
steady-state system that can withstand the stress of geographic
enclosure---what I have identified as the "full-world" problem in miniature. It
is the opposite strategy of the Ecomoderns' "decoupling" economic prosperity
from environmental impact, which they do in part by intensifying exploitation
of human-inhabited areas. And yet, it takes the same ideology of ecological
control that Ecomodernism is based on. The difference is that Gilman abandons
the economistic logic of optimization and externality---getting the most out of
what you use and ignoring what you do not by making it external to your
system---along with the capitalist logic of exploitation. She implicitly
identifies market logic as incompatible with her steady-state system.

## Conclusion: Utopian Naturalism

<!-- naturalism: determinism -->Herland's narrative, then, is an early,
ecologically conscious form of utopian literature, but it also challenges the
logic that is often seen as underpinning the genre of literary naturalism. The
environment that Gilman creates in the background of her narrative demonstrates
that the naturalist logic of "determinism," at least as it has been formulated
by twentieth-century critics, is in need of an ecocritical reevaluation.
Traditionally, the determinism of American literary naturalism is
unidirectional, with the human (as individual and as a species) defined by
external forces. The tension between the "country" and the "city" becomes a war
of influences on characters typologically standing in for those in similar
situations. This version of naturalist determinism demonstrates only how
natural and built environments exert influence on the humans who inhabit them.
Gilman's system is similarly concerned with environmental influences on human
development, but she explores these influences while demonstrating
that---intentionally or unintentionally, individually or as a whole---humans
and their actions also determine the shape of the very forces that, in turn,
determine them. There is no determinism but mutual determinism, no evolution
but coevolution, both in Gilman's naturalism and in the Anthropocene.


[^ln-naturalist-determinism]: Go into detail here, maybe import some into the
paragraph proper: Mitchell's 'Determined Fictions,' Peyser, the whole
mid-century milieu.

Among the few common themes of American literary naturalism agreed upon in the
criticism (a house somewhat divided, to say the least) is the relevance of some
degree of biological, environmental, or economic *determinism* on the fate of
the individual. Supposed simplistic or "mechanistic" determinism has often been
a topic of harsh critique for the genre, on both aesthetic and philosophical
grounds. More generous (and often more compelling) discussions of naturalist
determinism understand it as a strategy for complicating the notion of
individual agency and the coherent self, not as the means by which that self is
reduced or made irrelevant. Lee Clark Mitchell in *Determined Fictions*, for
example, includes in his naturalist canon works that depict the conflict
between the character's own self-conception as an “autonomous, integrated,
freely willing agent” and the countervailing narrative strategies that prove
that conception to be false; agency becomes largely psychological, while
determinism becomes a narrative, rather than an ontological, premise
[@mitchell_determined_1989 xv]. Donald Pizer is one of the more optimistic
voices on the topic of determinism, seeing in the resistance to “amoral”
deterministic forces a revitalization of “man’s sense of his own dignity and
importance” [@pizer_twentieth-century_1982 11]. But all of these treatments
share one trait: their determinism is *unidirectional*, with some external
"forces" always conceived as the force of change, and humans, individually and
collectively, as the things changed. Humans rarely alter the forces acting upon
them, and just as rarely do they seem to successfully transform themselves. In
*The House of Mirth*, *The Pit*, and *The Financier*, widespread capitalist
excess induces the paradigmatic "plot of decline" in the individual characters
through gambling and speculation, which in the eyes of these novelists amount
to the same thing. Elsewhere, malignant social influences lead to the moral
disintegration of the naturalist protagonist, but somehow that protagonist
never gets a word in edgewise. The conditions that, to the naturalist, *create
people* are not open to revision; they only revise. 

Quite probably, this account of unidirectional determinism loses some of the
complexity of the way determinism actually appears in many naturalist novels,
but it leaves out a defining feature of *Herland* in overlooking the ability of
Herlanders to change their environment, and in doing so, changing themselves.
Gilman's brand of determinism is unique enough that it causes some to recast it
as not naturalist at all---even Jennifer Fleissner, whose broader conception of
naturalism as posing a "serious confrontation with the meanings of 'nature''s
changing status in the modern world" motivates this dissertation
[@fleissner_women_2004 7]. It is because *Herland* "solves the problem of the
too-natural 'outside' and the too-cultural 'inside'"---a solution to which,
I argue, mutual determinism is essential---that Fleissner argues *Herland*
shoudl be seen as "a 'realist' response on Gilman's part to the troubling
'naturalist' vision of the attempt at order" that leads to a compulsive
stuckness in "The Yellow Wallpaper" [@fleissner_women_2004 95]. But to simplify
naturalist determinism to the point that resolution is impossible within
a deterministic system is to miss the more complex coevolutionary system of
determinants that must define any more ecological understanding of naturalism.
In Gilman's treatment, all of these various unidirectional determinisms come
together in a single, broad conception of mutual determinism between the human
and the constitutive elements of its environment. Gilman "solves" the problem
of naturalist determinism not by moving away from the concept, but by coming up
with a version of it that is somehow both more complex and more utopian. 

Where the determinism of Gilman's utopian form of naturalism diverges from its
more standard constructions is in her unabashed belief in the power of human
influence over these conditions. Indeed, the difference between what I am
calling "utopian naturalism" and traditional naturalism may merely be a matter
greater optimism with respect to transformative collective action. What
ultimately prevents deliberate influence over external conditions in the other
naturalist novels I brought up above is *failed* collective action, which hangs
over many specimens of the genre like a spectre. In *The Octopus*, stilted
collective movements take on the status almost of an obsession for Norris: time
and again he creates moments in which things might change forever, the masses
might be stirred into world-historical action, if only the right word is said
in the right manner---and time and again, that moment is missed or is
deliberately thwarted.[^norris-collective-examples] In *Sister Carrie*, too,
wage riots that might conceivably have revised the plight of someone like
Hurstwood silently crumble in the background of the main plot, mere set-pieces
laden with the possibility of an alternate
history.[^dreiser-collective-examples] In *Herland*, successful collective
action is assumed, but it is collective action in the absence of the
overwhelming force of a total system of capitalism. Only the women remain after
the disasters that sequester Herland from the rest of the world, and those
women respond to necessity apparently with one mind and with one possible
solution to the scarcity problem. What is utopian about the novel, then, is
perhaps not the promise of what collective action could achieve, but the ease
of achieving it in the first place and its totality once
realized.[^bellamy-collective-action] 

The basis of Gilman's more complex determinism is her engagement with ecology,
both through her extrapolations of Ward's ideas and her own reevaluations of
labor and inhabitation. Taking Lester Ward rather than Herbert Spencer as
a basis for her thinking on evolution (and all that evolution implies about the
forces that shape human and nonhuman organisms) led her to a model of the human
as a collective actor that is also shaped by what it acts upon. These ways of
shaping are demonstrated through her understanding of ambient labor and
coevolutionary inhabitation, both of which are modes of changing humanity by
changing its environment in ways that are non-disruptive and sustainable. 

Literary naturalism and the discourse around the Anthropocene are both fields
marred by notions of inevitability, the former at the hands of unidirectional
determinism, and the latter in the face of humanity's scale and pervasive human
influence. Gilman and the more rational arguments for a "good" Anthropocene she
anticipates share a desire to exceed that inevitability, by combining human
control of natural systems with a humbler reevalution of the way *human*
systems and concepts have developed. Ethical problems abound in all quarters,
but one thing is clear: the interactions of human and natural systems that
define both the Anthropocene and literary naturalism necessitate that we reopen
the fundamental categories of the human and non-human natures alike. Gilman
presents one example of how to do so.

These ethical caveats to Gilman's concepts of ambient labor and inhabitation
demonstrate that her utopian schema should be taken not as a model, nor as
a route to the good Anthropocene, but as a space to think through the
affordances and limitations of the good Anthropocene premise itself. What
Gilman does that the facile manifestos do not is to put our most fundamental
categories on the examination table. She recognizes that labor and living as
they have historically developed contain fundamental contradictions with
a sustainable future---a recognition which she was neither the first nor last
to make. In managing our concepts as well as what they describe, she models the
kind of thinking it would take to make human influence over natural systems
ultimately benign. But the absolute control over these systems, a fundamental
premise of her utopia and the philosophy on which it is based, forces us to
reckon with the additional contradictions these alternative futures introduce
in their own right. Good Anthropocene schemes ignore the ethical limitations at
their peril, we see: doing so risks a complicity with eugenics and a vastly
decreased biodiversity, all in the name of stewardship. Nevertheless, Gilman's
example makes a strong case for considering possibilities beyond catastrophe in
the Anthropocene, and imagining what it will take to thrive in the conditions
of scarcity that look more and more inevitable. These solutions will not always
be technical, she suggests. More likely, they will involve tiny revolutions in
how we conceive of our most basic categories of thinking, living, and acting.

[^dreiser-collective-examples]: Some of the stuff about Hurstwood accidentally
breaking a strike...
[^lemenager-transitions]: List some of LeMenager's sources and elaborate.

[^forestry]: Gloss on forestry; from Radical Ecology?

[^clifi]: Define clifi, show that it's an actual term

[^bioregionalism]: bioregionalism defs from Merchant? Or elsewhere, and some
history

[^bellamy]: note on what bellamy's system looks like and the influence on
Gilman, with sources of that influence

[^feminist-revival]: need some details on the whole revival in
the 80s

[^feminst-reception]: details on feminist reception and dismissal

[^environmental-social-economic-justice]: overview of recent links between
environmental humanities and social/economic justice

[^prior-art]: previous environmental readings

[^norris-collective-examples]: examples from the octopus of "the moment" when
things might ultimately have been different

[^dreiser-collective-action]: citations for collective action in sister carrie

[^bellamy-collective-action]: can compare to Bellamy here, the bloodless
transition

[^li-wen-chang]: summarize the part of chang's argument dealing with the middle
landscape

