---
---

# Antoinette Brown Blackwell

Her work "The Making of the Universe" is reviewed in the April 1915 issue of
*Forerunner*. The review is slight and not substantively interesting; but
another article in the issue discusses social evolution and world citizenship
as an antidote to destructive nationalism in terms that seem to borrow heavily
from Blackwell. Further, there is a clear relationship between Blackwell's
ideas and those that begin to emerge in Herland in the chapter that appears in
that issue. Blackwell:

"In structure-building man and the sons of man have proved themselves to be
the true sons also of the infinite Creator, for in their degree they have
closely followed His creative method. They literally carry on Nature's
processes of that class immeasurably faster than inorganic Nature ever has
done. In that line they are the crowning effort of Nature itself, a part of all
Nature, but on the heights" (166)

"That is, Nature's least units are each one internally and changelessly
correlatedly constructed" (179).

> If mind acts upon matter, matter reacts. / Liberty is, can be, under no legal
restraint of 'thou shalt not,' but it is under the checking restraint of the
moral law, 'thou oughtest not,' and 'if thou doest it the perilous natural
causes will irrevocably follow with undesirable results'" (180). 

Humans control "force" through technology, and "force" is the boundless,
resistless power by which nature acts (181)

And yet our conceptions of time are inferior to that of nature, making humanity
a poor substitute for the definite timekeeping of nature; precisely not
mechanistic, for the metaphor of the clock is presented as an inferior
substitute for what nature does organically. (183) "Nature is exact. We and our
symbols are inexact" (183). Gilman seems not to share this anti-Prometheanism,
necessarily, or not in the same way; she seems to fetishize the manager a bit
more.

"Nature holds in even balance the personal and the social" 188

juxtaposes improvements with wrongdoings, concludes: "Catastrophes have
quickened human comprehension of causes and impelled to a vigorous application
of available remedies" (189)

Book concludes: "The value of mankind as world makers is optional with mankind.
The value of each one of us is at our own option, for each choice is as
personal as personality itself. Hereditary trend, good or bad, may be outlived
and opportunity sooner or later is sure to come whether sought for, worked for,
and improved or otherwise; for soon mankind will take up social, mental, and
moral world making with increasing good will, and mighty effectiveness. And
personal self-molding and improving will by no means be forgotten.
    "We are already being taught that we must all stand or fall together. Are
we not already in the early dawn of a new era of ethic and aesthetic world
making?" (190-1)

The idea of humanity as both the stability-making logical culmination of
evolution and as the very guiders of that evolution seems to come from
Blackwell. In addition, the stewardship role as the destiny of humanity and the
"telos" in itself (humanity is the telos of nature, and after that the telos is
whatever we make it). 

Crucial to note from Worster: Very much like Georges Buffon (Worster 139) for
whom humanity is the very telos of nature, and then the telos is what we make
it, etc.:

Buffon: Comes up with the theory of epochs, separated by catastrophes, each one
more advanced. Until: "Finally, with the late appearance of man, the purposes
of the earth were at last realized. The explosions and deluges ceased, and the
supremely rational human mind took over the direction of progress, gradually
transforming the earth to suit civilized needs" (Worster 139)

next: check to see who Blackwell was reading/Blackwell's story
