---
---

notion: organize chapters according to distinct environments, kind of like
I was going to for the ecotopian imaginary:

The Farm (Town & Country):
    
    - discuss metabolic rift & its usefulness in understanding the human's
alienation from itself. 
    - "return to the farm" novels associated with post-apocalyptic novels; the
idea is basically that a return to the country is a de-alienation by
rediscovering a kind of bioregional sense of infrastructure and the basics of
life. 
    - in terms of env. determinism: in naturalism the determinism of the urban
decline plot maps closely with alienation (is this provable internally? / is
there a reason to introduce the Marxist intellectual framework?). The
discussion of Spencerian forces and the way that affects the individual; bodies
under manufacturing vs bodies on the farm;
    - basically: comparing the return to nature novel and the post-apocalypse
novel shows that environmental determinism has more to do with the role of
one's environment in the larger system of sustenance for the species. Changing
the relation to the environment leads to changes in the self (segue to
ecotopianism)
    - Darko Suvin: SF has more to do with the pastoral than it does with
mimetic realism
    - Works: London (Burning Daylight, others?); Norris (Octopus); Hamlin
Garland? (need to read); Stewart (Earth Abides); Butler (Parable series);
Cather (My Antonia, O Pioneers)
    - Is it possible to reverse this with some of the country-to-town novels of
post-reconstruction? I.e. the birth of Harlem? Or save that for the city?

The Garden (Ecotopia):

    - Essentially expanding on the idea that if environment determines the
nature of humanism and we can change the nature of our environment, we can
change the nature of humanism by guiding the development of environmental
forces.
    - Works: Gilman (Herland). Ecotopia (Callenbach). See other legit ecotopian
novels with a garden motif. Vs. the garden of Pueblo literatures? 

Space Station? City?

    - ???
    - logically leads from the garden conversation in that it tests the limits
of how much we can determine our environment; 
    - built environments in general; from sea voyage/submersible to spaceship?
Steinbeck's expedition book? Other scientific station novels? 
    - Is there, weirdly, a place for Cather's cliff cities here?

The Planet

    -KSR; History of terraforming novels; Mars in general
    - The Dying Planet
    - Hypothesis: we can think of terraformation as a complex response to
realizing the scope of our own power as a species (our intuition of the
anthropocene). The dying planet (I think) outlines the vision of Mars as
a dystopian vision of a species that had ultimate control over its planetary
environment and fucked it up; how strange that this vision leads to
terraformation fantasies on Mars, in which the planetary influence of the
species is assumed and absolute determination becomes a way of liberating the
species from a destroyed home planet
