---
---

Cli-fi, or "climate fiction," is becoming a strong contender as the literature
of the twenty-first century. It deals directly with climate change, which looks
to be the century's defining (if non-discrete) event; in its inherent
speculativeness it mirrors the rate of technological and biospheric change so
characteristic of the age; and it is a development of speculative fiction, a
genre that may have been born in the nineteenth century, but came of age and
reputability in the twentieth. The genre has seen a much more enthusiastic
reception than its predecessor. The path somewhat cleared by a more general
push for Anthropocene studies, cli-fi has found an academic reception
commensurable with its trade success. [ lit review ]

Before there was cli-fi, there was a more general vein of significant
environmentalist thought in speculative fiction, ranging from better known
examples like Frank Herbert's *Dune* (1965) to [ other example, Heinlein?
Burroughs? ]. In fact, the term "cli-fi" often indicates less an explicit
concern with climatological issues specifically as a recent entry in
a longstanding mainline of environmentalist thought in speculative fiction, but
now understood through the lens of a single overwhelming environmental issue.
Cli-fi, thus understood, far predates human consciousness of anthropogenic
climate change and the Anthropocene. More probably, it arises contemporaneously
with the Anthropocene itself.
 
But the literary and philosophical genealogy of the genre is more complex than
it appears, even with this expanded definition, and requires a discussion of
another genre entirely. The roots of the cli-fi's environmental speculation can
be found in the tradition of American literary naturalism... [ make the case
sans texts; define it in my terms, lean heavily on environmental determinism
(link it with ecological embeddedness); also a kind of historical literature
from below; dismiss plot of decline? Or "save that for the novel"... ]

...from the explicitly imagined worlds of Jack London in *The Scarlet Plague*
and *The Iron Heel* to the more subtle acts of global, ecological, and systemic
thinking in Frank Norris's *The Octopus* and *The Pit*. To define the
relationship in full, though, older purviews of literary naturalism that limit
themselves to likes of London and Norris exclusively will have to be set aside
in favor of more recent ones, like those of Jennifer Fleissner in *Women,
Compulsion, and Modernity* and [ x author in y work ], that have included women
and authors of color erroneously left out of the naturalist conversation.
Charlotte Perkins Gilman's ecotopian naturalist novel *Herland*, for example,
is often cited as a work of proto-speculative fiction, but it also tests the
limits of the naturalist understanding of environmental determinism. Charles W.
Chesnutt has begun to appear in the naturalist orbit, largely because he tests
some of the genre's philosophical underpinnings by working through a conception
of environmental embeddedness outside of (and while putting pressure on) the
scientism characteristic of naturalism's "mainstream". The purview of this
dissertation encompasses authors from the old and new schools of naturalism
studies alike, but the environmentalism of the former comes into a clearer
light with the addition of the latter into the fold.

The first chapter will consider the premise that the human has lost an
essential aspect of its nature and capacity for survival by reducing the
connection of an individual with its environment. This is a premise that is
most commonly associated with disaster or post-apocalyptic fiction, but 
