---
geometry: margin=1in
---

# Fellowship Year Plans

## Chapter Schedule

- Chapter 1 (London): June 1st - December 15th

    * Possible archive visit the week of July 1st

    * Workshopping with 20/21 Americanist colloquium in November

    * Tentative draft date: September 15th

- Chapter 3 (Norris): December 15th - May 31st
    
    * Tentative draft date: March 1st
    
## Additional Writing

- Article version of "Gilman's Garden" to submit to *American Literature*
(target date: August 31st)

- American Literature Association Conference, Boston, May 25th - May 28th 2017.
Panel: "Texts, Contexts, and Subtexts: Charlotte Perkins Gilman in Her Time,"
hosted by the Charlotte Perkins Gilman Society 

- MLA 2018, New York, January 4th - January 7th, 2018 (pending: my paper is
accepted, but the panel must still be approved). Panel:
"Anthropocene/Andropocene."

## Chapter One (London) informal abstract

Broadly speaking, I am investigating the ways species, race, and horticultural
systems collide in Jack London's agricultural novels, especially *The Valley of
the Moon* (1913), and how these coinciding themes prefigure the difficulties of
using the human *species* as a heuristic in the Anthropocene. In *The Valley of
the Moon*, Billy and Saxon flee the city of Oakland and "return to the land" in
an attempt to experience a fundamental humanness---a search that is complicated
and at times supplanted by contradictory perspectives on race. At first, London
seems to present a form of white supremacism, as his protagonists revel in
a shared "Anglo-Saxon" lineage through which they understand their own
experiences and desires. But later, they represent this lineage of conquest and
exploitation as the very thing that has stripped the American landscape of its
vitality and created the separation of town and country that they experience as
a loss of humanity. In order to experience their humanness, they must resist
the same racialized identity through which they previously understood
themselves and learn from the superior human ecology they see in practice on
the immigrant-owned farms of California. Conceiving of possibilities in the
human-nature relationship thus becomes a site of conflict for the very concept
of the human as species in London's eyes, just as it has a century later in
discussions of the Anthropocene.

As the proliferation of alternatives to the term "Anthropocene" demonstrates,
the "Anthropo-" prefix has been as contested in the humanities as the "-cene"
suffix has been in the sciences. "Anthropo-" seems to assign equal culpability
and equal risk to all humans, regardless of how one has benefited from the
fossil fuel economy or how imminently one is endangered by its climatic
outcomes. At the same time, understanding the effects of human activity
geologically seems to require a universalization of humanity, an act that
exceeds the bounds of human experience and the scope of human histories to
date. As Dipesh Chakrabarty puts it, "Species may indeed be the name of
a placeholder for an emergent, new universal history of humans that flashes up
in the moment of the danger that is climate change. But we can never
*understand* this universal. [... C]limate change poses for us a question of
a human collectivity, an us, pointing to a figure of the universal that escapes
our capacity to experience the world" (221-2). London's work is marked by
repeated attempts to narratively access the very experience of species that
Chakrabarty points out is unattainable, whether through animal characters in
his most famous works or through the "Mid-Pleistocene," pre-human primates of
*Before Adam* (1907). Reading London's work for this struggle with the
problematic heuristic of "species experience" can thus lend insight to
contemporary attempts to reconceive of human histories on a geological scale. 

Posing this question in the context of the rest of London's work can also bring
his less-read agricultural novels more closely into the ambit of the rest of
his work, influencing our readings of both as a result. Indeed, these late
agricultural novels can be seen as a new ground on which to explore themes that
defined his life and work more broadly. At the end of his life, Jack London's
dual obsession with species and race was joined by a third obsession, "natural"
living and farming techniques. Living and working on an experimental farm in
the Sonoma Valley, London's writing began to expound the theories on which his
agricultural practice was based, outlining industrial agriculture's
despoliation of the land in contrast to methods that develop the soil's
richness rather than stripping it of its resources. In the background of these
material and literary explorations are contemporaneous works such as Bolton
Hall's *Three Acres and Liberty*, a touchstone of the "back to the land"
movement, and F. H. King's *Farmers of Forty Centuries*, a study of "permanent
agriculture" methods in East Asian nations, that appear to have unified his
thinking about agriculture with his thinking on the human species and
evolutionary theory. Rather than being seen as a departure from his better
known animal novels and travel narratives, this ecological turn in London's
work should be understood as an extension of his long-standing attempts to
account for what Marx would call the human "species-being," or the defining
behavior of a species, and to navigate the contradictory views on race that
define much of his fiction. 
