---
geometry: margin=1in 
---

My dissertation discusses examples of American literary naturalism in which the
environment is an area of major concern, arguing that when naturalist texts
discuss the environment they tend to do so in ways that anticipate the
Anthropocene. This understanding of naturalism's take on "nature" recognizes
that the "human" and species in general are vexed concepts of naturalism, but
it also draws attention to the ways in which naturalist "systems thinking"
defines the genre's understanding of human interactions with non-human nature.
It is this systems thinking, I argue, that brings naturalism into contact with
contemporary Anthropocene discourse. ... [def naturalism, authors covered]

The Anthropocene is our current geological epoch. It was first proposed in the
early 2000s, and it suggests that human activity has been so pervasive as to
influence major geological conditions and processes---the official geological
start-date is likely to be placed somewhere in the middle of the twentieth
century, but others place it at the invention of the steam engine or even the
widespread adoption of agriculture. The Anthropocene has become a particularly
important area of study in ecocriticism because of its implications for the way
we understand the human in relation to nature: the human is now both part of
nature and its governing logic, the single (if not singular) determining factor
in the workings of the planet and every other organism. It is also a somewhat
controversial topic, with many rejecting the supposition that the human *per
se* is the cause of the destruction with which the Anthropocene is normally
associated (climate change etc.), and still others rejecting the unifying
identity of the "human" implied by the term, offering "Capitalocene" and
"Androcene" as possible alternatives. 

