---
---

Consider a series of novels in which the human population of a planet struggles
to meet its basic needs because the form of plant life they rely on for
sustenance has started to *fight back*. This plant is not supposed to grow
there in the first place: transported from another world, it has gained
a foothold in a foreign environment thanks to hubristic agricultural coercion
and controlled mutation, but before long it has come to span vast,
just-conquered landmasses. Not long after that it seems to have developed
a spirit of its own. The plant has whims, and the planet's human population
transforms its behavior to match them. A powerful financier attempts to
dominate the plant with market forces, despite the warnings of those who fear
it; when his life and his career are destroyed, the novel makes clear, it is
because this unmasterable force has asserted its almost mystical power in
retribution. Another would-be master of the plant is crushed beneath a wave of
its processed form, the plant's power asserted once again through sheer might.
On this planet dominated by a single non-human life form, in the "little,
isolate group of human insects, misery, death, and anguish spun like a wheel of
fire." And yet, "*the [plant] remained*. Untouched, unassailable, undefiled,
that mighty world-force, that nourisher of nations, wrapped in Nirvanic calm,
indifferent to the human swarm, gigantic, resistless, moved onward in its
appointed grooves" (Norris 448).

This summary might sound like an advertisement for a 1950s science fiction
film, in which a monstrous plant controls a distant planet. In fact, the planet
is Earth, the plant is wheat, and the series of novels is comprised of *The
Octopus* (1899) and *The Pit* (1901), Frank Norris's classic novels of American
literary naturalism. 

....

...I Will argue that the roots of cli-fi can be found in literary naturalism.
Not only can, but *should* be: naturalism was studying the interactions of
human and natural systems when precisely those interactions were ushering in
the Anthropocene. To only consider as cli-fi or Anthropocene fictions works
that occur after the discovery of anthropogenic climate change is to study only
effects, thereby overlooking perceptive critics of the causes (even though they
did not know what these causes were *of*). In other words, naturalist critiques
of twentieth-century social ecologies take on a new significance when we
recognize that they were writing at a critical moment in the environmental
history of America and the planet.
