---
---

Idea: link "good anthropocene" and transition towns/transition network? Do
these mean the same thing?

## Bennett *et al*

I think so in that g.a. just appears to mean "futures in which not everything
is well and truly fucked"

Possible to gloss "good anthropocene" as an optimistic stance toward collective
action? Where collective action means a functioning global democracy and robust
international organizations without larceny in their hearts... (441)

heavy on the word "transition"---seems to be the same movement/related

Above all does not equate human participation in determining environmental
futures disastrous in all cases; yet recognizes dangers

** is it possible to consider Gilman as just a utopian articulation of the positive
anthropocentric outcome Ward imagines to be possible? I think I've already said
this, but: Gilman is in a middle place between Wardian and "good Anthropocene"
visions of the human-nature imbrication and that of the catastrophic vision of
the Anthropocene. She starts with a catastrophe that asserts the ultimate
limits (what we now call carrying capacity) to human growth/resource use, which
the Herlanders allow to be ultimate---they do not surpass it for some reason.
And yet within those ultimate limits absolute Prometheanism and Wardian
"artificial selection" reigns supreme. She imagines the possibility of
a Prometheanism that respects limits, perhaps a more Baconian position than
most of Bacon's fans tend to assume (recall Bacon: gotta obey nature to master
it)**

## Hamilton: The Theodicy of the 'Good Anthropocene'

Truly describes Ward to a tee; strong source for this connection, in
combination with Ward himself; Hamilton's term "anthropodicy" is clunky but
useful

But ecomodernism appears to conflict with Bennett et al, who condemn this kind
of wild utopianism....

## Latour

A great technical fix which will allow the addicted to behave just as before,
except now he or she will go on with the benefit of a high tech product and the
happy support of his or her physician, mother and significant other. In other
words, “ecomodernism” seems to me another version of “having one's cake and
eating it too.” (220)

To modernize is to distribute agencies along a gradient that allows the
orientation of action in such a way that those who resist—who remain backward,
who remain archaic, etc—are beaten into submission. In other words, the use of
the concept of modernity allows us to shortcut the political process of
assemblies by introducing a radical, even revolutionary cut in the back of
those who move forward (221)

An Ecomodernist Manifesto is written entirely as if humans were still alone on
stage, the only being who out of its own free will is in charge of apportioning
space, land, money and value to the old Mother Nature. (The notion of
“decoupling” would be loved by psychoanalysts, I am sure). But this is, as
Clive Hamilton said yesterday, cruelly but accurately I think, a complete
anachronism. 6 Not content with the utopianism of modernity—rewilding,
decoupling, growing, smoking healthily without smoke—the ecomodernists are also
uchronists, as if they were living at a time when they alone were in command.
(223)

Never in history was there such a complete disconnect between the requirements
of time and space, and the utopian uchronist vision coming from intellectuals.
Wake up you ecomoderns, we are in the Anthropocene, not in the Holocene, nor
are we to ever reside in the enchanted dream of futurism. Down to earth is the
message I hear, but unfortunately not in the Ecomodernist Manifesto. I would be
very worried if an assembly such as this ignored which epoch it is in and on
which soil it resides—just as much as the police border officer who stamped my
passport, and who believed he was in the Bible.

But then you have to answer this simple question: how do you invent the
political constitution that is able to absorb the Anthropocene, namely the
reaction of the earth system to our action, in a way that renders politics
again comprehensible to those who are simultaneously actor, victim, accomplices
and responsible for such a situation? (224)

*Latour's basic complaint is that this is a way of avoiding the political;
curiously he defines political as drawing lines of alliance, but elsewhere as
assembly, due process, etc. There's an argument to be made that this is part of
what Gilman's oversight is in Herland, in that there is just a consensus as
magical as the conceit. Both the consensus and the conceit stand in for
important parts in the process as it would actually happen: namely, means of
limiting propagation and doing so in a way that respects assembly and
democratic consensus.*


## Crist

Useful overview of manifesto with a focus on its humanism in the opening

"On the other hand, the trajectory of global population is released to unfold as
it will. There is no call for active, assertive, and aggressive international
policies to accelerate the stabilization and reduction of the human population
as a strategy for heading toward a better world. (This omission is all the more
notable since a call to become proactive about population is compatible with
the modernization process that the authors advocate.) Instead, the population
question is mentioned in passing, only to be promptly dropped with the claim
that modernization—by fostering smaller families—will eventually lead to
a stable and perhaps lower global population. The power injected into
modernization to resolve the population question as a side-effect of
modernization itself, coupled with the Manifesto’s commitment to human freedom,
streamline to deliver its position: let population follow its present course
without agitating for international policies which might challenge people’s
reproductive behavior or their current cultural norms. Thus, moving forward,
global population size is something that happens not an issue we deliberately
and concertedly do something about." (246)

"On the other hand, the mass extinction of life forms that the human enterprise
has set into motion receives no mention in the Manifesto. (And extinction of
species is mentioned once.) This is a startling omission for an eco manifesto:
mass extinctions are geologically rare and catastrophic events; following such
past cataclysms, it took millions of years for biological diversity to
rebound—a timescale irrelevant for all future human generations. And yet the
omission of mass extinction makes sense from the Manifesto’s point of view."
(247)


"In version B of modernization[ the one supported by ecomodernists], we are
implicitly asked to believe, the perpendicular lines picturing modernity’s
impacts thus far will be softened into merely swelling curves by means of
decarbonization transitions, greater managerial and technological efficiency,
recycling operations, and greener material substitutes." (250)

"Global modernization (along with its peak impact) is instead represented as
something that should be completed and can be completed. The reason that it
should be completed is for all people to enjoy the social and material freedoms
that modernity offers. The reason that it can be completed is that there exist
no definite biophysical limits to growth." (251) * Herein lies the difference
with Gilman: for Gilman, everything results from the imposition of absolute
biological limits to growth*

"The nonhuman domain, on the other hand, is one of sheer living and nonliving
physicality, a world of objectivity that can, apparently, be rightfully and
continually absorbed into the human domain. And so, while the more-than- human
world can be damaged, it cannot be violated; even as it is endlessly changed
and assimilated, it is never colonized. The nonhuman world can be neither
violated nor colonized on account of a sleight-of-hand that humanism effects:
the condition of freedom—the indispensable ground for the full realization of
being and destiny—is arbitrarily rescinded from applying to that domain." 251

"The problem does not lie with the ideal of freedom, but with limiting that
ideal to humanity." (252)

"What would then galvanize our collective attention is the question of how we
inhabit Earth: including how many of us there are, how we organize our economic
relations, and what proportion of land and seas we occupy and use." (252)
*Crist's suggestion characterizes Gilman's approach pretty neatly*

## Collard et al.

The Ecomodernist Manifesto has two types of amnesia: regarding the violence
that allows for modernism and the struggles against this violence. 

General idea: we need new narratives, so that's cool, but we should be
suspicious of stuff that makes it seem this easy; ease is the thing that
modernism makes for the privileged few, and it's an illusion that exists by
unseeing the victims/people who pay for all this ease
