---
title: Throughput, or, Gestures Beyond Prometheanism
geometry: margin=1in
---

> [Throughput:] A measure of a computerâ€™s overall performance, as measured by
its capability to send data through all components of the system, including
data storage devices such as disk drives.... In modems, the rate at which data
moves from one modem to another.... (Webster's New World Computer Dictionary)

> [Throughput:] Output relative to input; the amount that passes through a
system from input to output. (Oxford Dictionary of Environment and
Conservation)

> ...throughput is the flow of matter and energy from nonhuman nature, through
the human economy, and back to nature as pollution. A steady-state economy
would use the lowest possible levels of materials and energy in the production
phase and emit the least possible pollution in the consumption phase. (Carolyn
Merchant, *Radical Ecologies*)

Almost a thousand people stand on Olympus Mons, the tallest volcano in our
solar system, and watch as an ice asteroid leaves a gash in the newly minted
Martian atmosphere. The asteroid has been commandeered by UN-approved robotic
ships that have landed, burrowed themselves into a secure purchase, and
converted the material of the asteroid itself into the fuel necessary to alter
its trajectory for this calculated near miss. The assembled crowd aren't in it
for the fireworks, though. They are a thousand among many Earth expats who have
undertaken every project conceivable to turn Mars into a surrogate for the
planet they've allowed to be destroyed. 

By the end of *Red Mars*, Kim Stanley Robinson's Nebula Award-winning novel
that begins his trilogy of terraformation, we have witnessed atmospheric
alterations as modest as the cultivation of ever-hardier bacteria to those as
audacious as drilling "moholes" through the Martian crust to tap the heat at
its core. By the end of the third book (*Blue Mars*), a third generation of
humans native to Mars lounge on the beach of a Martian ocean. But just as
important to the novel's mission are its economic, political, and social
innovations. The creation of an atmosphere can only happen simultaneously with
the challenge of what a Martian constitution will look like, or, more relevant
to my purposes, of adapting Earth-based understandings of environmental
activism to a planet without a biosphere. 

"Science fiction" and "sustainability" seem just about made for each other:
both are vexed terms, and both take on arguably too much. The most serious
examples of both require us to think through the intersections of technology,
ecology, sociopolitical systems, and even the ontological status of the human.
At the intersection of these two fields, Robinson uses the space of the "dead"
planet as a laboratory for social-ecological experiments, both testing the
limits of our environmental concepts and imagining the possibilities of human
development without the constraints of Earth's particular biosphere. I want to
isolate one product of this experimentation in particular for discussion here,
namely, the role of technology in what we might call the "ecotopian
imagination." [But in the spirit of Robinson's own experimentation, I want to
stage this discussion in the context of the multifaceted concept of
"throughput," a term increasingly important to ecological economics and social
ecology, but which also has unexamined relevance in discussions of technology.]

***

"Robotics" in Robinson's hands looks considerably different from the more
famous version associated with, say, Isaac Asimov---humanoid robots whose goal
is to serve in the way humans serve, and whose fictional instantiations are
usually taken as proxies for class struggle or enslavement.[^ln-robot-slaves]
In much of Robinson's work, robots appear in the form of mobile industrial
machinery that places an unfathomable transformative power in the hands of the
programmer. This vision of industrial robotics creates an interface between
materiality and information: programmed commands, which are merely particularly
structured acts of communication, become coextensive with the material
transformations they cause. Thus, Robinson's robotic manufacturing technologies
bridge the assumed gap between environment and our understanding of environment
by decreasing the distance between communication and transformative
action---or, to translate, between structures in the mind and structures in
matter. 

We never get to see what this interface looks like precisely, but it can be
inferred that it combines high-level human input with intelligent automation.
From start to finish, the information being transferred is emphatically *not*
where to place each plunge of the drill, but rather the transfer of a human
user's construction plan to the machine. As is required for "intelligence" in
any artificial system, the details are determined by the robot receiving and
interpreting feedback from the material reality it encounters. The result is
that "creation" and transformation are merely a matter of communicating some
feasible thing one wants to happen in a structured way the robot can
understand. The actual labor is reduced to making a good plan and figuring out
how to relate it. In this particular industrial army, to put it another way,
everyone is a general. 

One example of this process has already been presented---the robot landers that
capture an ice asteroid and bring it into the Martian atmosphere. Very little
of this process is seen of that in the novel itself. One of the more explicit
examples of how this form of technology actually works comes in a moment of
crisis near the end of *Red Mars*. Someone sabotages a water station near a
major town that taps into a large aquifer, and the hydrostatic pressure beneath
the surface of the planet threatens a catastrophic explosion that would create
the first Martian ocean where the town used to be. Any hope of preventing this
relies on their ability to collapse an overhanging cliff face onto the site of
the break to contain the pressure and plug up the hole---and to do so within a
matter of hours. Nadia, a character particularly occupied with construction,
takes over:

> During the ride over she had directed all the town's construction robots from
their hangar to the foot of the north wall, next to the water station; when the
two rovers got there, they found a few of the faster robots had already
arrived, and the rest were grinding over the canyon floor toward them. There
was a small talus slope at the foot of the cliff.... Nadia linked into the
earthmovers and bulldozers and gave them instructions to clear paths toward the
talus; when that was done, tunnelers would bore straight into the cliff.... The
slower robots arrived, bringing an array of explosives left over from the
excavation of the town's foundation. Nadia went to work programming the
vehicles to tunnel into the bottom of the cliff, and for most of an hour she
was lost to the world.

One of the more detailed acts of "construction" in the novel, it is a
particularly telling portrait of what human labor looks like on Robinson's
Mars. If we want to know what Nadia actually does, we can just look at the verb
phrases of which she is the subject. By the time the cliff is brought down,
Nadia has "directed," "linked into," and spent several hours "programming," all
of which can be summed up by the phrase "gave them [the robots] instructions."
Meanwhile, the robots were "grinding" out their efforts "to clear paths," "bore
straight into the cliff," and thereby "tunnel" their way to Nadia's intended
result. Comparing the sets of verbs, the division of labor is clear: Nadia does
the thinking, the robots do the work. 

No surprises here. But it's important that the robots are more intelligent than
mere tools. The ability to "clear a path," imagined from a programmer's
perspective like Nadia's, would require an ability to take in and synthesize
feedback (literally, debris) encountered along the way. The division of labor
Robinson imagines, then, relies on networks of communication for the
transmission of instructions and complex intelligent systems to allow those
instructions to stay on a high level of abstraction.[^ln-loa] This latter point
is important, because maintaining a high level of abstraction in communicating
instructions to a machine keeps those instructions in the language of the human
imagination. The experience of reading these moments in Robinson's fiction is
that we assume any concrete transformation to the environment that can be
imagined can be made to happen. 

Though this particularly violent moment of transformation is useful in
revealing the narrative mechanism of thought and transformation, in most ways
it is anomalous. Moments of crisis-aversion like this are few and discrete,
whereas patient construction is continuous and defines the trilogy. The same
methods that Nadia uses to plug up the punctured aquifer are used by all of the
first hundred colonists to build their settlements and pursue their
terraformation efforts. Communal shelters are built out of bricks from
automated "brick factories," which are set up to convert the materials at hand
in the inorganic rock surface of the planet (the regolith) into a usable form.
Most exciting (if also most improbable) is the ability "to construct soil just
like they had...magnesium bars" by converting leftover nitrogen into
fertilizers to mix with the rocky regolith, supplementing soil brought from
Earth along with the organic material of greenhouses with these human-produced
mixtures. This process, too, is a matter of communicating the plan for
constructing soil to a series of robots, now in the form of factories. But it
is not a matter of pounding rock slurry into particularly useful shapes or
collapsing geographical structures. It is the quiet work of creating the
foundations for life, work that is usually automated but not intelligent,
millennia of material flows. 

The role of information transfer in this process, particularly the transmission
of imagined structures, is largely left implicit. Among the trilogy's
industrial fantasies is the process of reducing physical matter (air, dirt,
anything) into basic elements, which can then be recombined to form new usable
materials at the scale necessary for life on Mars. The chemicals in the Martian
atmosphere are absorbed and sifted for the most useful elements by "air
miners." These elements, along with those extracted from the regolith, are run
through a maze of other chemical transformations to produce everything from
water to ultralight metals that might crumble on Earth but are sufficiently
sturdy for the low gravity of Mars. 


This should sound like rank Prometheanism, or the (often implicit) view that
"nature" is something to be conquered by science, human ingenuity, and
ever-more-developed tools. But the dead environment of Mars makes the relevance
of nonhuman natures dubious at best, forcing us to reconsider the place of
technology in ecological thinking. To put it simply, Robinson challenges us to
go beyond Prometheanism in our thinking about nature and technology. 

[^ln-halt]: *Halt and Catch Fire* is an AMC drama about the rise of personal
computing in the early 1980s. In the show's fourth episode, breaking the
Doherty Threshold is taken as a major benchmark of their impending success.

[^ln-doherty]: The document survives on IBM's website, a figure from a document
entitled "The Economic Value of Rapid Response Time."
http://www.vm.ibm.com/devpages/jelliott/evrrt10.html

[^ln-robot-slaves]: Follow up on refs from Imaginary Worlds

[^ln-loa]: Do I need to explain what a high level of abstraction is?
