
***

Before I can talk about Robinson's experiments with technology and
environmental change, I have to introduce this protean term "throughput" that
sits at the crux of technology, ecology, and economics. In a sense, the term is
useful less in itself than as a point where these three fields come together.

Definitions of the term proliferate, in part because of its basic simplicity.
The shared ground of these definitions can be defined as follows: compare what
goes in to what comes out, either in terms of quantity or time, and use that
ratio to measure whatever happens in between. The variation occurs in the
specific inputs, outputs, and "whatever happens in between"---and these
elements are where it gets complicated. 

Technologically speaking, the term seems hard to get excited about, a
relatively simple metric akin to something like "horsepower" in a car. Someone
interested in communication networks would talk about the rate of data transfer
from point to point, as when the Webster Computer Dictionary defines it as data
transfer between storage devices or "from one modem to another." But, as usual,
introducing a human to the equation complicates things, as, for example, in the
amount of time it takes a computer to process inputs and respond with an
appropriate output. This "lag" between input and output was recently dramatized
in TV's *Halt and Catch Fire*[^ln_halt] as the "Doherty Threshold," an ideal
response time of less than 400ms, which is based loosely on an IBM document
from 1982 mapping savings directly to miliseconds of lag (and therefore, we
might say, information throughput from user to computer).[^ln_doherty] The
question of the user will come up again when discussing the Mars Trilogy, but
in its most basic form, information throughput's inputs and outputs are of the
same order, information rendered as bits on a storage device.

A purely ecological version of throughput is similarly modest, measuring the
amount of energy or physical matter that passes through an ecological system.
These material flows are determined by regional ecologies and the human systems
of production that cut across them and alter them. Inputs into an ecological
system include solar energy as well as human and nonhuman effluents that enter
and modify the ecological system. Here, too, the inputs and outputs are the
same: matter and energy. Introducing "information" into this system would be
meaningless, just as the materiality of the storage device is merely a matter
of hardware. 

But in ecological economics, the term has gained an importance that it doesn't
have in other fields, largely because it is able to deal with the hybridity
this field demands. When throughput gets any more complicated than it is in
computation and ecology---that is, if there is more variation between inputs,
outputs, and "whatever happens in between"---the term can introduce a certain
amount of slippage between systems that we imagine to be neatly separated.
Carolyn Merchant, for example, provides a definition of throughput that is
catered to social ecology (that hybrid of hybrids), in which material and
conceptual transformations occur every step of the way. The input "of matter
and energy" is imagined as *always* coming from nonhuman nature, "whatever
happens in between" is designated as the human economy, and the output, what
returns to the system, is always pollution, which can be materially similar to
the inputs but is conceptually distinct, all the "nature" and neutral
ecological value stripped away. Though imagined as a single "system," the
process of throughput in ecological economics is actually marked by distinct
conceptual systems from start to finish.

It is not just that these systems are distinct that makes the
ecological-economic version of throughput so difficult, but rather that each
system (economics, ecology) is largely ignorant of those on either side of
it---hence the necessity of the hybrid discipline. The challenge in reconciling
these two definitions of "throughput" is to overcome a fundamental
incommensurability in their terms. To the human economy, nonhuman nature is a
positive externality, understood in the capitalist imagination as the "free
gifts of nature" (to adopt Marx's phrasing), where "free" can be translated as
'without economic existence.' It isn't "matter and energy" that flow, but
value, and the increase in value follows no known laws of constraint within a
purely economic system. Similarly, without a legal apparatus to make it so,
pollution is merely what is expelled from the economic system as
without-economic-meaning. But from the other side, looking purely from the
vantage point of material flows, there is just no such thing as a human
economy. Exchange value is notoriously immaterial, setting aside any material
properties except insofar as they exist in the mind of the parties performing
the exchange. And yet somehow, despite this mutual incommensurability, the
inputs and outputs end up always as material flows in the social-ecological
reckoning, rendering the abstract human sphere of "whatever happens in between"
all the more mysterious.

Something is needed to think through of each of these steps in the
social-ecological balance sheet. I propose that it is a neglected middle-term,
technology, which exists as a translator between abstract and material forms of
throughput. But "technology" requires its own (still quite broad) categories
wihtin it. Our twenty-first-century data bias might cause us to think of
technology solely in terms of the communication-network definition of
throughput, namely, data transfer from one entity to another; but we have to
also recognize that what matters most to material flows are what might be
classified material or industrial technologies. Such technologies translate the
material and energy of nonhuman natures into pollution, yes, but also into more
meaningful alterations to the *oikos*. In other words, we need to think of
throughput as in some way recursive, with outputs that change not only the next
round of inputs but also "whatever happens in between." 

But this distinction between communication and material technologies still
leaves us with a fundamental problem. It doesn't solve the problem of
reconciling immaterial "information" and material systems, which is what
technology as a "middle term" is meant to reconcile. 

That's where Robinson's use of robotics comes into play. 


