---
geometry: margin=1in
---

### One Thousand Words

Imagining new worlds became much more complicated as the American frontier
exhausted itself, industrialized agriculture seemed to conquer the land once
and for all, and markets circumnavigated the globe. With no uncultivated space
remaining, authors imagining narratives in alternative societies would
henceforth have to carve a space for them out of populated spaces rather than
"wilderness"; those who wanted imagine an alternative to industrialized,
exploitative metabolism between the human and its environment would have to
first create the conditions in which any alternative could be imaginable. To
plausibly envision a new social ecology, it would no longer be sufficient to
have merely an *ecological imaginary*, a conception of "nature" on its own. An
"ecotopian" imaginary would now be required, a conception of ecological and
social futures as dialectically bound. 

My dissertation will trace what I am calling the ecotopian imaginary in
American fiction of the long twentieth century, from American literary
naturalism to speculative fictions at the turn of the millennium. The ecotopian
imaginary in fiction is the narrative construction of spaces that lead to the
creation of speculative social ecologies. Ecotopian spaces often share common
characteristics: social, economic, and ecological closure; an attention to
energy throughput that includes human actors; and responsiveness to a larger,
contemporaneous political or social regime or movement. They often also share
formal features: when they do not adhere to the traditional plot of the utopian
novel, ecotopian spaces tend to be sequestered in their own sections, and
entrances and exits from such spaces often have a transformative or
wish-fulfilling effect on plot and characters. Above all, ecotopian spaces
articulate an environmental (if not always environmentalist) perspective in
resistance to a dominant socioecological regime. 

An ecotopian imaginary in general can be understood as a conception of an
alternative social ecology outside of a dominant "metabolism" between the human
and its environment, while understanding that such alternatives must reckon
with a dialectic of human and natural flows. In some cases, this means
recognizing that an ecological revolution requires a social revolution to
enable it, or at least a sequestration from the totality of what has been
called "capitalist nature." In Frank Norris's *The Octopus* (1901), for
example, Presley tries in vain to access the uncomplicated pastoralism of a
previous age, but his sheep are slaughtered by the railroad, Norris's figure of
capitalist strangulation and a totalizing market. His pastoral escape route
destroyed, Presley glimpses the route to an alternative ecological regime in
the form of a collectivist farming association. As he works with the farmers'
movement, he realizes that such a future is prepared for not by plowshares
alone, but also by mass marches and bombs thrown through windows. In other
words, changing a social ecology requires political action.

But while some ecotopian imaginaries suppose that changes in the cultural and
political sphere enable ecological changes, others conceive of changes in human
environments that engender corresponding changes in cultural systems. In an
ecotopian society predicated on a relationship with the land, any social or
political alternative requires a transformation of the most fundamental means
of production, the land itself. In *Herland* (1915), Charlotte Perkins Gilman
imagines a race of women who, faced with crisis, must transform their land in
order to survive: their population far exceeds what their regional ecology is
able to support, and in order not to starve they have to increase the
productivity of the soil itself to a level commensurate with the requirements
of their population. A change in infrastructure is necessary, but insufficient.
They survive by reconceiving of social development in terms of refinement
rather than growth, in opposition to the masculinist culture they superceded
with its expansionist frontier mentality and competition-driven markets.
Gilman's world implicitly establishes a version of environmental determinism
that quickly turns into a form of progressive environmental praxis: by changing
environments at the most fundamental level, it is possible to transform the
cultures that "grow" out of them. 

Far from relying on political praxis, environmental praxis disrupts the
separation of and environmental political change. This form of ecotopian
thinking is brought to maturity on the "high frontier," or ecotopian
speculative fiction. Tracing the (largely) post-war conceit of terraformation
in American SF allows a limit-test of environmental praxis---of the limits to
both human control over non-human systems and naively deterministic views of
environmental influence. The history of terraformation fiction, culminating in
the recent work of Kim Stanley Robinson, troubles both sides of the
human-environment binary to isolate the dialectical relationship itself.

Though the temporal boundaries of this dissertation are far apart, the
specificity of the spaces it studies limits its breadth. Because ecotopian
imaginaries imply a mutually deterministic relationship between human and
non-human systems, I will focus on naturalism and speculative fiction, two
genres that share an interest in manipulating systemic conditions in order to
imagine the effects (in terms either historical or future-historical). Within
and between these poles, though, are literatures less tied to generic trends
that imagine similarly intimate relationships between the human and its
environment, which also think through speculative social ecologies using
enclosed spaces. I will examine several characters in Willa Cather's novels who
appropriate and reimagine Ácoma Pueblo ruins as zones where they can create
non-heterosexist divisions of domestic labor, comparing these instances with
some ways Pueblo writers displaced from the ruins of their originary
environments reinhabit the cultural systems that grew out of those environments
in a different place and time. Other possible topics for consideration include
the former plantation as a site of ecotopian responses to historical trauma and
the urban enclave that becomes the new site for displaced European peasant
cultures.

Reading such spaces can reveal an important spatial aspect to a given text's
imaginative capacities, but reading many of them historically can offer
something larger to environmentalism and the environmental humanities. An
implicit political argument underlies this project: that under conditions of
impending crisis, contemporary environmentalism needs a utopian imaginary, and
reading for ecotopian spaces can reveal material for this imaginary in
unexpected places. 

Word Count: 995
