---
geometry: margin=1in
---

### One Thousand Words

As the American frontier exhausted itself, industrialized agriculture seemed to
conquer the land once and for all, and markets circumnavigated the globe,
imagining new worlds became much more complicated. With no uncultivated space
remaining, authors imagining narratives in alternative societies would
henceforth have to carve a space for them out of civilization rather than
"wilderness"; those who wanted imagine an alternative to industrialized,
exploitative metabolisms between the human and its environment would have to
first create the conditions in which any alternative could be imaginable. It
would no longer be sufficient to have an ecological imaginary (a distinct
conception of nature). What we might call an "ecotopian" imaginary would now be
required. 

My dissertation will trace what I am calling the ecotopian imaginary in
American fiction of the long twentieth century, from American literary
naturalism to speculative fictions at the turn of the millennium. The ecotopian
imaginary expresses itself in fiction as the narrative construction of spaces
that lead to the creation of speculative social ecologies. Ecotopian spaces
often share common characteristics: social, economic, and ecological closure;
an attention to energy throughput that includes human actors; and
responsiveness to a larger, contemporaneous political or social regime or
movement. They often also share formal features: when they do not adhere to the
traditional plot of the utopian novel, ecotopian spaces tend to be sequestered
in their own sections, and entrances and exits from such spaces often have a
transformative or wish-fulfilling effect on plot and characters. Above all,
ecotopian spaces articulate an environmental (if not always environmentalist)
perspective through transformations in the material realities of a dominant
ecological regime. 

An ecotopian imaginary can be understood as a conception of an alternative
social ecology that resists the dominant "metabolism" between the human and its
environment, while understanding that such alternatives must reckon with a
dialectic of human and natural flows. Perspectives that I am identifying as
ecotopian recognize, first, that an ecological revolution requires a social
revolution to enable it, or at least a sequestration from the totality of what
has been called "capitalist nature." In Frank Norris's *The Octopus* (1901),
for example, Presley tries in vain to access the uncomplicated pastoralism of a
previous age, but his sheep are slaughtered by the railroad, Norris's figure of
capitalist strangulation and a totalizing capitalist market. His pastoral
escape route destroyed, Presley instead glimpses the route to an alternative
ecological regime in the form of a collectivist farming association. As he
works with the farmers' movement, he realizes that such a future is prepared
for not by plowshares alone, but by mass marches and bombs thrown through
windows. In other words, changing a social ecology requires political action.
But just as changes in "nature" require changes in "culture," so is the reverse
true. In an ecotopian society predicated on a relationship with the land, any
social or political alternative requires a transformation of the most
fundamental means of production, the land itself. In *Herland* (1915),
Charlotte Perkins Gilman imagines a race of women who, faced with crisis, must
transform their land in order to survive: their population far exceeds what
their regional ecology is able to support, and in order not to starve they have
to bring the productivity of the soil itself into line with the requirements of
their society. 

Reading such spaces can reveal an important spatial aspect to a given text's
imaginative capacities, but reading many of them historically can offer
something larger to environmentalism and the environmental humanities. An
implicit political argument underlies this project: that under conditions of
impending crisis, contemporary environmentalism needs a utopian imaginary, and
reading for ecotopian spaces can reveal material for this imaginary in
unexpected places. 


