---
geometry: margin=1in
---

### Five-Hundred Words

My dissertation will trace what I am calling the ecotopian imaginary in
American fiction of the long twentieth century, from American literary
naturalism to speculative fiction. The ecotopian imaginary in fiction is the
narrative construction of spaces that lead to the creation of speculative
social ecologies. Ecotopian spaces often share common characteristics: social,
economic, and ecological closure; attention to energy throughput that includes
human actors; and responsiveness to a contemporaneous political or social
regime or movement. They often also share formal features: when they do not
adhere to the traditional plot of the utopian novel, ecotopian spaces tend to
be sequestered in their own sections, and entrances and exits from such spaces
often have a transformative or wish-fulfilling effect on plot and characters.
Above all, ecotopian spaces articulate an environmental (if not always
environmentalist) perspective through transformations in the material realities
of a dominant ecological regime. 

An ecotopian imaginary in general can be understood as a conception of an
alternative social ecology outside of a dominant "metabolism" between the human
and its environment, while understanding that such alternatives must reckon
with a dialectic of human and natural flows. In some cases, this means
recognizing that an ecological revolution requires a social revolution to
enable it, or at least a sequestration from the totality of what has been
called "capitalist nature." But others conceive of changes in human
environments that engender corresponding changes in cultural systems. Works
like Gilman's *Herland* turn this relationship into a form of environmental
praxis that unites political and environmental change, a premise that comes to
maturity in the speculative fiction of Kim Stanley Robinson at the end of the
century.

Though the temporal boundaries of this dissertation are far apart, the
specificity of the spaces it studies limits its breadth. Because ecotopian
imaginaries imply a mutually deterministic relationship between human and
non-human systems, I will focus on naturalism and speculative fiction, two
genres that share an interest in manipulating systemic conditions in order to
imagine the effects (in terms either historical or future-historical). In
particular, I will consider the dialectic of human and non-human systems in
Frank Norris's *The Octopus*, a classic of American literary naturalism, and
Charlotte Perkins Gilman's *Herland*, which I read as a form of utopian
naturalism. I will also examine several Willa Cather novels whose characters
appropriate and reimagine √Åcoma Pueblo ruins as zones beyond heterosexist
divisions of domestic labor, comparing them with some ways Pueblo writers
articulate their own displacement. Other possible topics include former
plantations as sites of an ecotopian response to historical trauma and urban
enclaves that becomes new sites for displaced European peasant cultures.

Reading such spaces can reveal an important spatial aspect to a given text's
imaginative capacities, but reading many of them historically can offer
something larger to environmentalism and the environmental humanities. Under
our current conditions of impending crisis, contemporary environmentalism needs
a utopian imaginary, and reading for ecotopian spaces can reveal material for
this imaginary in unexpected places. 

