---
---

**[Intro, cover slide]**

**[blank slide]**

Though it is a deeply ecological work, *Herland* is not often read in the
context of ecology and conservation in the early twentieth century---a somewhat
surprising gap given that the novel was published in a key moment in the
development of both fields. This critical aporia is not for lack of interest in
the general context of Charlotte Perkins Gilman's work: from discussions of her
participation in domestic reform movements to her troubling interest in
eugenics, Gilman scholarship has indeed been highly contextual. 

Rather, I propose that Gilman's place in the history of ecological and
environmental thinking is visible now in a way that it hasn't been before. The
reason for this is the introduction of the Anthropocene as a concept, and its
theorization in disciplines beyond the natural sciences. In addition to
changing the way we read Gilman's own work, having this concept to think with
opens up new avenues of inquiry into some of the influences that are already
well known. 

In what follows, I will explore an ecological strain to Lester Ward's influence
on *Herland*---an influence that has largely been discussed in terms of either
sociology, evolutionary theory, or eugenics. In doing so, I hope to put the
work of both Ward and Gilman in a historical context that is of particular
interest now, in an age of worsening anthropogenic climate change. But I also
hope to use this history to sketch a connection between *Herland* and the
broader critical conversation of ecocriticism in the Anthropocene.
Specifically, I will argue that Gilman's fictional elaborations on Ward's
theories constitute an early perspective on a so-called "good Anthropocene":
a concept that grants the scale of detrimental human influence on the planet,
but suggests that such influence should be *guided* rather than lessened.

***

I'll begin with the novel itself. In addition to its meditations on gender, evolution, and economics, *Herland*
is obsessively concerned with the physical environment. The isolated country of
Herland, sequestered after a natural disaster and populated by women who
reproduce parthenogenetically,  is a land "in a perfect state of cultivation,
where even the forests looked as if they were cared for; a land that looked
like an enormous park, only that it was even more evidently an enormous garden"
[@gilman 42]. The methods of this cultivation and care claim the focus of much
of the novel: the semi-captive narrator, Vandyck, forwards the Herlanders'
disquisitions on everything from the selection and propagation of certain
species to the construction of an increasingly productive soil. 

But what is immediately evident in every inch of this environment is that human
Herlanders are at the center of everything we would normally think of as
"nature"---at the center not in the blundering and self-defeating way that
characterizes most of actual environmental history, but in a manner that is
deliberate and results in a more productive total system. 

One example sums up particularly well the form this interaction takes---and
also gives us a hint of why a traditional ecocritical reading of the novel so
quickly becomes problematic [slide]:

> “It was a butterfly that made me a forester,” said Ellador. “I was about
eleven years old, and I found a big purple and green butterfly on a low flower.
I caught it, very carefully, by the closed wings, as I had been told to do, and
carried it to the nearest insect teacher...to ask her its name. She took it
from me with a little cry of delight. ‘Oh, you blessed child…. This is a female
of the obernut moth,’ she told me, ‘they are almost gone. We have been trying
to exterminate them for centuries. If you had not caught this one, it might
have laid eggs enough to raise worms enough to destroy thousands of our nut
trees---thousands of bushels of nuts,---and make years and years of trouble for
us.’"

The Herlanders' thinking about their environment in this moment is far from
"deep ecology," a conservationist movement premised on the fundamental value of
all living things. Indeed, it hardly seems to value "nature" at all in any of
the modes we are used to seeing---as the sublime, the untamed wild, or in the
more contemporary mode, as a fragile and endangered other.

Gilman turns away from these commonplaces, but she is not unaware of them, of
course. Indeed, she sets up the *expectation* of a sentimental appreciation of
the natural world's beauty, narrating what appears to be a tender embrace of an
aestheticized butterfly. But it is an expectation that she emphatically
reverses. The creature first becomes an object of study, something to be
brought to an "insect teacher" for further examination. And by the end of the
passage, we realize that Ellador's careful pursuit of the obernut moth will
ultimately culminate in the its death---as well as what may be the last stage
in the deliberate extinction of an entire species. The value that this obernut
moth holds is in the negative---in the value that, from the perspective of
human Herlanders, will be conferred to the entire system by its destruction.

To appreciate nature in Herland, then, means to understand it and to transform
the “natural” into a system that maximizes benefit to humans---and also to the
fictional obernut tree, but only incidentally. Understanding the web of
interrelations among the organisms in question, they have created a situation
in which nurturing their environment will mean nurturing themselves (123). 

The same is true for the entire environment of Herland: there is no "wild"
nature to contend with, but only heavily mediated semi-natural systems that
have in some way been touched by Herland's human inhabitants. The decisions and
actions taken by Herlanders as a collective have a clear deterministic
influence on the development of every other species. 

Furthermore, though this influence is isolated to the small, sequestered region
that defines Herland geographically, to the Herlanders it is the entire world.
The land itself thus becomes a narrative device for making the interlocking
relationships of an entire closed world comprehensible by making that world
smaller---conceptually similar to the "Biosphere 2" experiment of the --'s, and
subject to the same population and production pressures of the earth. We are
told that Herland's guidance of its natural environment and social systems
alike began in response to a growing population contained in a finite space. In
other words, they understood that they were the crux of Herland's natural
systems, and they also understood that their existing way of living would
degrade their environment to the point that it would not support them.

To frame the issue in this way makes clear *Herland*'s relevance to the
Anthropocene. But if Gilman anticipates the terms of this discourse, she hardly
shares its tone, which is often apocalyptic in discussing the place of the
human in natural systems, where Gilman is triumphal. Herein lies one of the
apparent contradictions at the heart of Herland's ecological sensibility. On
one hand, the Herlanders recognize the insurmountable pressures of their
growing species on their "full world." On the other hand, however, they resolve
this pressure not by lessening their impact, but by making it even more total and
deterministic; not by becoming less anthropocentric in their conceptions of
nature, in other words, but infinitely more. 

To understand this contradiction and the way that Gilman resolves it, we must
look to Lester Ward's influential work of 1883, *Dynamic Sociology*, which
Gilman took as a foundation for her novel and which confronts the same tension.

There have been many excellent studies of Gilman's friendship with Lester
Ward---those of Cynthia J. Davis and Judith A. Allen are especially
comprehensive. The existing work is deeply interested in the shared
sociological and evolutionary theories of the two writers, but it has largely
overlooked Ward's background in environmental studies as an influence on
*Herland*. 

**[ward covers slide]**

Ward spent the formative years in which he wrote *Dynamic Sociology* as the
chief paleobotanist for the U.S. Geological Survey. These years gave him the
time and space to begin his career as a sociologist, but they also steeped him
in the nascent field of ecology and the American conservation movement. He
worked under the guidance of John Wesley Powell, the founder of the USGS and an
early voice urging stewardship of the land in place of the purely extractive
relationship that had until then prevailed. Powell's work was in turn built on
the foundation of George Perkins Marsh's revolutionary work from 1864, *Man and
Nature: Or, Physical Geography as Modified by Human Action*, which was
extremely influential in the decades after it was published and has come back
into focus now as one of the key early texts in the history of the Anthropocene
as a theory. Marsh polemically asserts that "human action must rank among
*geological* influences," thereby laying the groundwork for a geological epoch
defined by an expansion of that influence [@marsh 464]. John R. Ross, in
a study of the origins of the conservation movement, draws a direct line of
influence from Marsh to Powell to Ward, saying that Powell "read Marsh's work
and remembered the lessons" in his own, and that Powell was the "seminal
leader" for Ward's labors both on the Geological Survey and, to a lesser
extent, in his early writing [@ross 52-3]. **[blank slide]**

The context of Ward's early work, then, is defined by progenitors of the idea
that the human species is at the center of apparently "natural" systems---even
as early as the end of the nineteenth century, and even where human influence
was not directly visible. The impact of these figures is evident throughout
*Dynamic Sociology*, but especially where Ward discusses the wastefulness of
agriculture and industry. For example, he writes **[slide]**:

> The natural resources of the earth are squandered with a wanton disregard of
the future. The forests are cut down to supply temporary wants, consumed by
escaping campfires, or purposely cleared for tillage, until the habitable
portions of the earth are successively transformed into lifeless deserts. The
soil is rapidly exhausted by the first occupants, who know only the immediate
present. The wild animals useful to man are soon extinguished by the heartless
destruction of the fertile females and helpless young. [@ward 89]

As Ward tells it, humanity's encounters with our natural environment despoliate
it, and what is left behind is an exhausted waste land. And yet, as we see
elsewhere, the wasteful methods of human activity are not *against* nature, but
merely an expression of nature's own tendencies. He argues that **[slide]** the
"wasteful methods [that] prevail in society" are merely the same "as in the
animal and vegetable kingdoms," for "nature acts on the assumption that her
resources are inexhaustible" [@ward 87-8]. Where Marsh and Powell tended to see
conservation as protecting nature from human rapacity, Ward sees wastefulness
as a natural extension of the very wildness that defines nature itself. 

Herein lies the same paradox we see in *Herland*. On one hand, human actions
tend to have a detrimental and determinative effect on the natural systems in
which they intervene. But on the other hand, natural systems left to their own
devices are seen as unremittingly destructive, and at least as "wasteful" as
humanity itself. We see this in the case of the "obernut moth" in the passage
from Herland with which I began, which would obliterate the population of the
most productive nut trees in Herland if unchecked.

As with the Herlanders, Ward's solution to the excesses of unchecked natural
systems is to manage them. But in his theory, managing nature means managing
humanity itself, for we are **[slide]** "an integral part of this great
unconscious creative whole called nature, only a minute fraction of which can
by any possible means be brought within the range of [our] experience" [@ward
11]. The portrait of a wasteful humanity that Ward paints in this passage is
a portrait of a humanity that has not *yet* taken its conscious
self-improvement upon itself. The mechanism for this self-improvement is in
part governance. For Ward, **[slide]** government is an outgrowth of the human
capacity for "egoistic altruism, protecting others for the benefit of the
self," and arises out of a "moral sense which protects others where natural
laws would destroy them" [@ward 14]. Rendered in terms of resource preservation
and the future benefit of human beings, environmental protection is just an
outgrowth of an "extra-natural" moral sense based on selfish selflessness. 

But at the same time as it presents an anthropocentric view of nature, this
ontology incorporates humanity more fully into the ambit of an essentially
natural evolutionary system. If humanity is at once a part of nature and
nature's manager, then as a species we become *nature's means of managing
itself*. Ward *does* see the human as a unique part of the natural
whole---unique in that our processes are "teleologic[al]" rather than
"genetic." But because we are still part of nature, nature's activity *becomes*
teleological through us, as we use our purposive action to guide the
development of the entire system. Ward thus imagines the human as both the apex
of evolution and evolution's replacement. It's as though all of non-human
nature were a body devoted to growing the head that would guide its further
actions, and that head is the human species. 

In Gilman's extension of the principle, Ellador and the rest of the Herland
foresters have as much a right to determine the place of the obernut moth in
the Herland ecology as they do to control their own impact on it, because they
are all part of a single cycle to which the Herlanders supply a *telos*.

For both Ward and Gilman, then, the way out of humanity's detrimental and
determinative influence is therefore, paradoxically, to recognize humanity as
part of the natural systems of which we are also the guides. This theorization
of the human-nature relationship anticipates the Anthropocene to the extent
that it conceives of humanity as a defining force within the interlocking
natural systems of the earth. But while Ward accepts the extent to which this
influence has historically been destructive, he sees it not as destructive in
itself, but as a process in need of reform. 

If George Perkins Marsh has been taken as a progenitor of apocalyptic theories
of the Anthropocene, Ward and Gilman can be taken as early theorists of the
"good Anthropocene," a loose and heterogeneous set of perspectives that eschew
the apocalyptic rhetoric of other Anthropocene theories in favor of a triumphal
embrace of human-led development of natural systems. **[slide]** Contributions
to the theory of a good Anthropocene range from modest catalogues of projects
promoting adaptation, rewilding, and sustainable agriculture to more polemical
works like the controversial "Ecomodernist Manifesto" from 2015, whose many
signatories from across scientific and humanistic disciplines argue in favor of
"decoupling human development from environmental impacts" by "intensifying many
human activities" in smaller and less integrated spaces---or, in their more
characteristically triumphal tone, "putting humankind's extraordinary powers to
work." Gilman's vision of the good Anthropocene would seem to fall somewhere in
between the two, emphatically not "decoupling" the fortunes of humanity and
nature, but also conceiving of increased, but wiser, human intervention as the
solution to ailing natural systems. 

The route to this wiser relationship is not a technological revolution. It is
a fundamental shift in the social and cultural categories we use to organize
our action---the kind of shift that Gilman imagined her fiction as enacting.

I only have time today to briefly outline the most interesting of these
transformations in *Herland*: Gilman's depiction of what I am calling "ambient
labor." Ambient labor replaces the money economy and commodity production with
a form of labor in which the only thing produced is *the Herland environment
itself*. Ellador, the forester, is again the quintessential example, this time
of the Herland laborer: the work of forestry is to make subtle interventions
that improve or maintain the natural environment. This is just as much
a transformation in their *conception* of what is produced as it is
a qualitative change in what they produce. Though forestry is far and away the
most discussed "profession" in the novel, other products that in our economy
would be commodified are able to become part of the ambient environment all the
more easily because they are held in common. This is true whether the product
in question is academic study devoted to Herland's male protagonists, the
results of which are equitably distributed across Herlander and transform the
way they understand their own country relative to others, or the construction
of homes, which are like habitats that come to Herlanders automatically at
a certain stage in their development.

In addition to conceiving of the *product* of labor as the environment itself,
ambient labor is labor that *is itself ambient*, meaning it fades into the
background, becoming not the *focus* of living so much as incidental to the
*process* of living. Ellador encounters the obernut moth in the course of
pursuing her own desires and self-development, to return again to her example.
But the category of labor is also expanded to include the labors of the human
organism. The biological labor Herlanders perform naturally is harnessed using
infrastructure that returns waste to the soil, for example. Conceiving of human
activity as such effectively places the labor of humans on par with the
ecological work done by other organisms---metabolically cycling nutrients,
processing carbon in the air, pollinating, and so forth. Through this dual
nature of ambient labor, the good Anthropocene becomes the basis of an
ecological economy.

[By revisiting Lester Ward's influence on Charlotte Perkins Gilman to think
through the relevance of both to the Anthropocene, then, we can do two things.
First, we can give greater depth and range to the intellectual history of an
important contemporary theory. But we can also bring to light elements of one
of Gilman's most important works that were difficult to see before
contemporary theory returned to tread similar ground.]
