***


On the narrative level, this passage sets up, and then reverses, an expectation
of conservation, disclosing instead an ideology of environmental management
more typical of forestry.[^ln-forestry] The tender, careful handling of the
frail creature will ultimately culminate, we realize, in the its death, as well
as the last stage in a deliberate extinction of the entire species. This
reversal effectively replaces uncomplicated reverence for the "natural world"
with a commitment to transform the “natural” into the system that most benefits
humans (and also the fictional obernut tree, if only incidentally).
Understanding that the obernut moth limits the propagation of the obernut, and
realizing that the obernut is Herland’s “best food-nut,” they create
a situation in which nurturing the environment they have crafted will mean
nurturing themselves (123). 

Of course, this type of ecological management also contains some of the basic
problems of a Herland forestry more broadly conceived, problems that fall along
the same lines as the ethical and material complaints leveled at proponents of
the good Anthropocene. The Herlanders hardly seem to blink at the forced
extinction of a species for the benefit of the human Herlanders, even though
there will be no other obernut moth in the world as they know it---recalling
Crist's rebuttal to the Ecomoderns, "mass extinction does not have a technical
solution" (247). Furthermore, this action would violate the deep ecologist's
fundamental ethical axiom: that there is an inherent value in every living
thing, regardless of its value as a resource. It also presumes perfect
knowledge of what will happen when the obernut moth is exterminated,
a manageable equation in the novel but one that could have unpredictable
consequences in any real-world setting---in fact, considering this scenario as
though it were real, an overabundance of the obernut moth could well have been
an unintended result of another act of "control."[^ln-management-disaster] Part
of the fiction here is that perfect knowledge and absolute control over an
ecology are even possible.

They do not brave this shaky ethical ground out of a pursuit of wealth or
profit, however. Herlanders are intervening in an attempt to protect the
highest-yield form of food, protecting their own survival as a species. As is
common in utopian novels since Thomas More, money is the first thing to be
eliminated in Gilman's imagined society, and with it goes any thought of
accumulation or excess. The object of labor is always a more stable and
comfortable means of survival within their regional ecology, as opposed to
profit-motivated industrial agriculture, which places the effects of human
labor beyond the reach of any but the most direct ecological ramifications. The
Herlanders are the managers of this ecology, but with the recognition that they
are also part of it; they are both variables in the equation and the
mathematicians who are solving it, the gardeners and part of the garden.

[^ln-forestry]: Forestry from Leopold, Merchant

[^ln-management-disaster]: cite the thing about wolves in Yellowstone... This
is Teddy Roosevelt's whole idea of game management, namely you eliminate the
other apex predators so you can have all the critters for yourself. But this
has outrageous downstream consequences, like rivers rerouting, erosion, etc.

---

Thinking about Herland through an economic lens is an especially clear way to
demonstrate this interdependence, precisely because doing so is so difficult:
normal economic categories fail to describe the system, and new ones are
required. The meaning of "labor" in a world without money is always going to be
ambiguous, but here the blending between economic, ecological, and social
structures adds an additional level of difficulty. The wholesale transition of
Herland's natural environment to an orderly progression of ecological zones
appears to have happened through a process that shares the characteristics of
a natural ecological progression (with humans included in the ecology, of
course), of a massive public works project, and of transformations in the social
understanding of individuals and communities. The way these elements come
together is particularly clear when the Herlander Ellador describes the process
of becoming a forester:

---

[It will not be a revelation to most scholars of Gilman's work that her
friendship with Lester Ward had a significant impact on her fiction and
non-fiction alike. Much of the critical discussion of this relationship has
concerned the extent and nature of this influence, but most commentators unite
in focusing primarily on their shared belief in an originary "gynaecocentric"
culture and a corresponding evolutionary method of female sexual selection
[@allen 59-61]. Cynthia J. Davis points out that theoretical influences are
especially significant given Gilman's vision, articulated in *The Man-Made
World, or Our Androcentric Culture*, of a theoretically engaged fiction that
would "teach not by preaching but by truly re-presenting," often with the
explicit goal of forwarding or countering the works of other theorists [qtd. in
@davis 73].] 

---

[It should be said that by drawing lines between Gilman and the "good
Anthropocene" I do not mean to ascribe to or promote it as a program. If
anything, the association of Gilman and Ward with the good Anthropocene should
underscore the many emphatic critiques of the "Ecomodernist Manifesto" in
particular as too comfortable with anthropogenic mass extinctions and too
committed to a version of history in which humanity is the only actor---as
Bruno Latour puts it, the manifesto is "written entirely as if humans were
still alone on stage, the only being who out of its own free will is in charge
of apportioning space, land, money and value to the old Mother Nature" [@Latour
223]. Considering these critiques both strengthens the case relating Gilman and
Ward to the good Anthropocene, in that these same critiques apply to both, and
points to a new cause for caution in works that have already been heavily
problematized by contemporary commentators. ]


