---
title: Environmental Speculation - American Literary Naturalism and the Anthropocene
bibliography: prospectus.bib
---

### Outline: 

<!--1. **Overview** - reading ALN as Anthropocene literature by rereading the
unexamined trend of environmental speculation. Def. environmental speculation-->

My dissertation will argue that American literary naturalism is an early form
of Anthropocene fiction, revealing a largely unexamined strain of environmental
speculation that pervades the work of several of the genre's major authors. By
"environmental speculation," I mean the narrative construction of possible
environmental futures or hypothetical alternatives to the dominant social
ecology of the novel's historical moment. "Speculation" in general can be
distinguished from the normal inventiveness of fiction by a matter of scale,
when the fictive conceit is so significant as to have world-altering
properties, whether in a physical sense or world-historical sense, in order
demonstrate something about the world as it is or might be. I will suggest that
these authors use environmental speculation to represent the nascent changes in
the world ecology that have since defined our current, human-centered epoch.
Whether imagining a near-extinction event, in Jack London's case, or
anticipating the ways in which the global economy would effect local ecologies
and agricultural communities in the case of Frank Norris, authors who are
otherwise known for Zola-esque, "scientific" depictions of reality sometimes
break from realistic description of the present when dealing with environmental
changes. Instead, they range into hypothetical futures, impossible presents, or
alternative histories, despite being surrounded by ecological exploitation that
one might think could be merely represented. The reason for this trend,
I hypothesize, is that in order to represent the effects of the environmental
shifts happening in the present, these naturalists had to find devices to
represent a much wider temporality---something approaching geological time. In
a very real sense, ecologically-minded literary naturalists were casting
forward to something like *our* present in their construction of a moment when
the ramifications of the twentieth century's beginning are beginning to be
felt. This speculative impulse in combination with the authors'
better-documented penchant for description and systemic thinking make plain
naturalism's relevance to the Anthropocene: they were observing and analyzing
the emergence of conditions that would usher in the epoch, but they were also
trying to imagine what human and non-human life would become in a state of
environmental crisis.

<!--2. **Definition of terms** - def. ALN (before me (1) and how I respond
(2)).-->

Understanding naturalism as Anthropocene literature will go against the grain
of much in the history of naturalist criticism, and as such my argument will
require a reexamination of the terms by which the genre is defined. I will
define American literary naturalism as a movement active from 1890 to 1945 in
the United States that traced the co-determination of human and natural
systems---that is, both the ecological embeddedness of human systems and the
influence of human activity on natural systems---through a period during which
the human-nature relationship was undergoing a series of material and
philosophical revolutions. Naturalism examined these changes by using the
individual as a narrative focal point for historical, economic, and natural
shifts that extend beyond a single person, rather than taking individual
subjectivities or relationships among them as the narrative focus in their own
right (in contrast to naturalism's generic cousin, realism). 

My definition will necessarily dispute or revise several hegemonic definitions
of naturalism, from V. L. Parrington's in 1930 to more recent accounts near the
end of the twentieth century, while building to a much greater extent on
naturalist criticism of the past decade. Three major themes predominate in
early naturalist criticism, each of which I will hope to complicate:
determinism, the plot of decline, and a straightforward Darwinist or social
Darwinist interpretation of nature and social organization. Defining naturalism
by a simplistic philosophy of determinism in which the individual will is
entirely subsumed by external forces, I will argue, reflects more of the
concerns of early naturalist critics than those of the authors themselves [cf.
@fleissner_women_2004]. Defining the genre by determinism, a philosophy with
roots in scientific racism, risks inadvertently keeping naturalism exclusively
white, excluding authors for whom (as Morgan argues) determinism more often
describes a relationship of black people with the white elite than it does
a "natural" law [@morgan_black_2012]. I will suggest "natural embeddedness" as
an alternative to the principle of environmental determinism, a shift that
I hope will offer both a more descriptive and more epistemologically inclusive
framework. The second trope sometimes used to define the genre is the "plot of
decline." Most notably articulated by Donald Pizer, it has been powerfully
challenged by more recent work that emphasizes the compulsive repetition at the
center of many women writers' work during the period [@pizer_theory_1993,
@fleissner_women_2004]. Finally, I want to suggest that the tendency toward
Darwinist evolutionary thinking in the most-studied naturalists is merely one
part of a larger commitment in naturalism to grappling with the place of the
human in the natural and nature in the human. This last argument will be
indebted to a more recent naturalist critic, Jennifer Fleissner, who argues
that naturalism's larger project is to pose a "serious confrontation with the
meanings of 'nature''s changing status in the modern world"
[@fleissner_women_2004 7]. Moving beyond these once-hegemonic definitions of
naturalism will allow me to reveal the under-studied ecological relevance of
many of the genre's major texts, but it will also open up the genre to a wider
purview of authors than the mostly white, mostly male, mostly epistemologically
homogeneous milieu of Stephen Crane, Jack London, Frank Norris, and Theodore
Dreiser. While I will devote a chapter each to London and Norris, in the
remaining two chapters, Charlotte Perkins Gilman's *Herland* and two stories
from Charles W. Chesnutt's *The Conjure Woman* will also be read as
"naturalist" in the sense I have defined here.

<!--3. **Theoretical Justification of project** - Chakrabarty and universalism;
reading the human *as species* in naturalism vs. Chak.; environmental
speculation as a way of representing ephemeral and distant ecological,
historical, economic changes-->

To understand the place of literary naturalism within theorizations of the
Anthropocene, however, is likely to present less of a challenge. The question
Chakrabarty poses in his influential essay "The Climate of History: Four
Theses," one of the core texts of Anthropocene studies in the humanities, can
be translated intact to the present topic. He asks, "How does the crisis of
climate change appeal to our sense of human universals while challenging at the
same time our capacity for historical understanding?" To take the latter
question first: if climate science has dismantled the distinction between human
and natural histories by refiguring the human as a geological force, as
Chakrabarty argues, that distinction had already been troubled in literature by
the naturalists' incorporation of the paradigms of natural history into the
contexts of human history and social life. This assertion holds true even
beyond a strictly ecological context, as in the example of Dreiser's *The
Financier*, a semi-historical novel that explains historical events like the
financial panic of 1873 as the product of characters driven by evolutionary
forces---that is, a theory of natural history. [Analogies to non-human
organisms famously underscore this incorporation of the human into natural
paradigms throughout the genre, such as passages on the "Mycteroperca Bonaci"
(black grouper) and the predator-prey relationship of a squid and a lobster in
*The Financier*, or Edith Wharton's analogy of a woman bound indelibly to
traditional social roles to "the Kentucky cave-fish, which had ceased to
develop eyes because it had no use for them" [@wharton_age_2008 58].] The other
part of Chakrabarty's question dealing with "our sense of human universals" is
similarly resonant with most definitions of naturalism, my own included. He
suggests in the essay's conclusion that "climate change poses for us a question
of a human collectivity, an us, pointing to a figure of the universal that
escapes our capacity to experience the world," arguing that "a global approach
to politics" is therefore needed that does not succumb to the "myth of a global
identity" [@chakrabarty_climate_2009 222]. Naturalism is unlikely to evade the
trap of the universal "human" identity, but its narrative technique of using
the individual subjectivity as a focal point for the experience of a larger
whole must be part of any history of understanding and representing the human
on a planetary scale. In short, two defining features of the genre, the
imbrication of human history with natural paradigms and the representation of
humanity at a scale well beyond the individual, are also defining features in
theorization of the Anthropocene.

<!--4. **Historical justification of project** - present the historical/anachronism
problem: literature of the Anthropocene is often defined by our consciousness
of anthropogenic climate change. Instead, we should look for the literature
that was attending to its causes when they began. ; periodizing with geological
time; outline changes in energy systems and economics using literary
evidence-->

This does not, however, address the fundamental anachronism with which I began,
the imputation of Anthropocene thinking not only before the epoch's discovery,
but before it is even said to have begun.[^At the time of writing, The Working
Group on the Anthropocene... has recommended several criteria that would place
the start of the epoch around the middle of the twentieth century,
including...] What distinguishes my proposed understanding of Anthropocene
literature from those of previous studies is inclusion of literatures that
either mount ecological critiques of those tendencies that would eventually
lead to humanity becoming a geological force or present an understanding of
nature that anticipates the changing status of the human. Most discussion of
Anthropocene literatures have defined their field of study as
hyper-contemporary. If we limit the scope, as some do, to novels directly
"about global warming" or climate change, only works that present an
*awareness* of climate change are even eligible---in other words, nothing
earlier than around 1990 [@trexler_anthropocene_2015]. Others, though they
attend to the ways in which contemporary novels may adapt their
"self-positioning as temporal artifacts of their genre as they become novels of
the Anthropocene," do not attempt a repositioning of any earlier literatures in
response to the new epoch's discovery [@marshall_what_2015]. As Lawrence Buell
suggests, however, such projects that work "through exegesis of such works of
global warming imagination as exist" are merely one component (albeit
important) of how literary studies can engage the Anthropocene. Among the
others methodologies is a "reinterpretation of texts from precontemporary eras
that engage issues of anthropogenic climate change, even if not global warming
specifically"---projects like Ken Hiltner's "Coal in the Age of Milton" and,
I would add, Anahid Nersessian's *Utopia, Limited*, both of which put periods
far removed from the present in contact with the contemporary crisis they
precipitated [@buell_ecocriticism_2011, @hiltner_coal_2011,
@nersessian_utopia_2014]. I propose that an important piece of this larger
project is a genre that was paying careful attention to the human's place in
nature, was doing so in the country where some of the most destructive shifts
were taking place, and began shortly before the first scientific study relevant
to climate change was conducted, Svante Arrhenius's 1896 study of the effects
of coal on atmospheric temperatures [@trexler_anthropocene_2015 2].

[If we only consider as Anthropocene fictions those works
that occur after the discovery of anthropogenic climate change we will study
only the literature responding to the effects of the crisis, overlooking
perceptive narrative critiques of its causes. Naturalist critiques of
twentieth-century social ecologies take on a new significance when we recognize
that they were writing at a critical moment in the environmental history of
America and the planet, in terms of both the literary and environmental
histories to which it is relevant.]


5. **Critical justification of project** - How has nobody seen this? 1.
Scholarly preoccupations - weirdly absent from ecocriticism and weirdly
non-ecocritical discourse in naturalist criticism; cli-fi, again, is
misconstrued as a contemporary genre

6. **Literary historical legacy** - but really, the stuff naturalism started
just took a drastically different form for most of the 20th century. The
scientific preoccupations of naturalism were transformed into science fiction
as the century continued. 
    A. Relationship of the two genres
    B. environmental speculation is a major SF strain that came about first in
naturalism; but the legacy blinds us to the origin
    C. I shall attend to these continuities in the organization and content of
the chapters, but primarily in my introduction and conclusion
    D. Readings of contemporary work will take a more distant view to outline
the trends and mainlines, while close reading will mostly be reserved for
naturalist texts.
