---
title: Environmental Speculation - American Literary Naturalism and the Anthropocene
bibliography: prospectus.bib
---

### Outline: 

<!--1. **Overview** - reading ALN as Anthropocene literature by rereading the
unexamined trend of environmental speculation. Def. environmental speculation-->

My dissertation will read American literary naturalism as an early form of
Anthropocene fiction by revealing a largely unexamined strain of environmental
speculation that pervades the work of several of the genre's major authors,
a tendency these authors used to represent the nascent world-historical changes
that have since defined our current human-centered epoch. By "environmental
speculation," I mean the narrative construction of possible environmental
futures or hypothetical alternatives to the dominant social ecology of the
novel's historical moment. Whether imagining a near-extinction event, in Jack
London's case, or anticipating the ways in which the global economy would
effect local ecologies and agricultural communities in the case of Frank
Norris, authors who are otherwise known for Zola-esque, "scientific" depictions
of reality tend to break from describing things as they are when dealing with
environmental changes. Instead, they range into hypothetical futures,
impossible presents, or alternative histories despite being surrounded by
ecological exploitation that one might think could be merely described. The
reason for this trend, I will argue, is that in order to represent the effects
of the environmental shifts happening in the present, these naturalists had to
find devices to represent a much wider temporality---something approaching
geological time. In a very real sense, ecologically-minded literary naturalists
were casting forward to something like *our* present, when the ramifications of
the naturalist moment are beginning to be felt. The speculative impulse in
combination with the better-documented penchant for description and systemic
thinking make reveal naturalism's relevance to the Anthropocene: they were
observing and analyzing the conditions that would usher in the epoch, but they
were also trying to imagine life in a state of environmental crisis.

<!--2. **Definition of terms** - def. ALN (before me (1) and how I respond
(2)).-->

Understanding naturalism as an Anthropocenic literature will go against the
grain of much discussion in the history of naturalist criticism, and as such
will require a reexamination of the terms by which the genre is defined. I will
define American literary naturalism (henceforth just "naturalism") as
a movement active from 1890 to 1945 in the United States that traced the
co-determination of human and natural systems---both the ecological
embeddedness of human systems and the influence of human activity on natural
systems---through a period during which the human-nature relationship was
undergoing a set of material and philosophical revolutions. Naturalism examined
these changes by using the individual as a narrative focal points for
historical, economic, and natural shifts that extend beyond a single person,
rather than taking individual subjectivities or relationships among them as the
narrative focus in its own right (as is the case for naturalism's generic
cousin, realism). 

My definition will necessarily dispute or revise several hegemonic definitions
of naturalism from V. L. Parrington in 1930 to more recent accounts near the
end of the twentieth century, while building to a much greater extent on
naturalist criticism of the past decade. Three major themes are notorious in
early naturalist criticism, each of which I will hope to complicate:
determinism, the plot of decline, and a straightforward Darwinist or social
Darwinist philosophy. Defining naturalism by a simplistic philosophy of
determinism, I will argue, reflects more of the concerns of early naturalist
critics than of the authors themselves [@fleissner_women_2004]. Built on
a foundation of scientific racism, it also risks inadvertently keeping
naturalism exclusively white, excluding authors for whom (as Morgan argues)
found determinism only at the hands of the white elite rather than as
a "natural" category [@morgan_black_2012]. I will suggest that an alternative
of "natural embeddedness" will offer both a more descriptive and more
epistemologically inclusive framework. The second defining trope is the "plot
of decline." Most notably articulated by Donald Pizer, it has been powerfully
challenged by more recent work that emphasizes the compulsive repetition at the
center of many women writers' work during the period [@fleissner_women_2004].
Finally, I see the tendency towards post-Darwinist evolutionary thinking is
merely part of a larger commitment in naturalism to grapple with the place of
the human in the natural and nature in the human. This last point is endebted
to a more recent naturalist critic, Jennifer Fleissner, who argues that
naturalism's larger project poses a "serious confrontation with the meanings of
'nature''s changing status in the modern world" [@fleissner_women_2004 7].

    A. Before me, three hegemonic defining factors: 
        i. determinism 
        ii. plot of decline 
        iii. Darwinism.
    B. Rebuttal: 
        i. is racist and environmental determinism should be supplanted by
ecological embeddedness. 
        ii. is overly formalist and inconsistent across the literature
        iii. Darwinism is merely one way among many that authors were grappling
with the place of the human in the natural and vice versa

3. **Theoretical Justification of project** - Chakrabarty and universalism;
reading the human *as species* in naturalism vs. Chak.; environmental
speculation as a way of representing ephemeral and distant ecological,
historical, economic changes

4. **Historical justification of project** - present the historical/anachronism
problem: literature of the Anthropocene is often defined by our consciousness
of anthropogenic climate change. Instead, we should look for the literature
that was attending to its causes when they began. ; periodizing with geological
time; outline changes in energy systems and economics using literary evidence

If we only consider as Anthropocene fictions those works that occur after the
discovery of anthropogenic climate change we will study only the literature
responding to the effects of the crisis, overlooking perceptive narrative
critiques of its causes. Naturalist critiques of twentieth-century social
ecologies take on a new significance when we recognize that they were writing
at a critical moment in the environmental history of America and the planet, in
terms of both the literary and environmental histories to which it is relevant.


Most discussion of "Anthropocene literatures" have defined their field of study
as hyper-contemporary. If we limit the range, as some do, to novels "about
global warming" or climate change, only works that have had time to respond to
the issue are even eligible---in other words, nothing earlier than around 1990
[@trexler_anthropocene_2015]. Others, though they attend to the ways in which
contemporary novels may adapt their "self-positioning as temporal artifacts of
their genre as they become novels of the Anthropocene," do not attempt
a repositioning of any earlier literatures in response to the new epoch's
discovery [@marshall_what_2015]. As Lawrence Buell suggests, however, such
projects that work "through exegesis of such works of global warming
imagination as exist" are merely one component (albeit important) of how
literary studies can engage the Anthropocene. Among the others is
a "reinterpretation of texts from precontemporary eras that engage issues of
anthropogenic climate change, even if not global warming
specifically"---projects like Ken Hiltner's "Coal in the Age of Milton" and,
I would add, Anahid Nersessian's *Utopia, Limited*, both of which put periods
far removed from the present in contact with the contemporary crisis they
precipitated [@buell_ecocriticism_2011, @hiltner_coal_2011,
@nersessian_utopia_2014]. 

5. **Critical justification of project** - How has nobody seen this? 1.
Scholarly preoccupations - weirdly absent from ecocriticism and weirdly
non-ecocritical discourse in naturalist criticism; cli-fi, again, is
misconstrued as a contemporary genre

6. **Literary historical legacy** - but really, the stuff naturalism started
just took a drastically different form for most of the 20th century. The
scientific preoccupations of naturalism were transformed into science fiction
as the century continued. 
    A. Relationship of the two genres
    B. environmental speculation is a major SF strain that came about first in
naturalism; but the legacy blinds us to the origin
    C. I shall attend to these continuities in the organization and content of
the chapters, but primarily in my introduction and conclusion
    D. Readings of contemporary work will take a more distant view to outline
the trends and mainlines, while close reading will mostly be reserved for
naturalist texts.
