---
title: Environmental Speculation - American Literary Naturalism and the Anthropocene
bibliography: prospectus.bib
---

My dissertation will argue that American literary naturalism is an early form
of Anthropocene fiction, revealing a largely unexamined strain of environmental
speculation that pervades the work of several of the genre's major authors. By
"environmental speculation," I mean the narrative construction of possible
environmental futures or hypothetical alternatives to the dominant social
ecology of a novel's historical moment. "Speculation" in general occurs when
the fictive conceit is so significant as to have world-altering properties,
whether in a physical sense or world-historical sense, in order demonstrate
something about the existing world as it is or might be. I will suggest that
these authors use environmental speculation to represent the nascent changes in
the world ecology that have since come to define the Anthropocene. Whether
imagining a near-extinction event, in Jack London's case, or anticipating the
ways in which the global economy would effect local ecologies and agricultural
communities in the case of Frank Norris, authors who are otherwise known for
Zola-esque, "scientific" depictions of reality sometimes break from realistic
description of the present when dealing with environmental changes. They range
into hypothetical futures, impossible presents, or alternative histories,
despite being surrounded by ecological exploitation that one might think could
be merely represented. The reason for this trend, I hypothesize, is that in
order to represent the effects of the environmental shifts happening in the
present, these naturalists had to find devices to represent a much wider
temporality---something approaching geological time. In a very real sense,
ecologically-minded literary naturalists were casting forward to something like
*our* present in their constructions of a moment when the ramifications of the
twentieth century would begin to be felt. This speculative impulse, in
combination with the authors' better-documented penchant for description and
systemic thinking, make plain naturalism's relevance to the Anthropocene: they
were observing and analyzing the emergence of conditions that would usher in
the epoch, but they were also trying to imagine what human and non-human life
would become in a state of environmental crisis.

Understanding naturalism as Anthropocene literature will go against the grain
of much naturalist criticism, and as such my argument will require
a reexamination of the terms by which the genre is defined. I will define
American literary naturalism as a movement active from 1890 to 1945 in the
United States that traced the co-determination of human and natural
systems---that is, both the ecological embeddedness of human systems and the
influence of human activity on natural systems---through a period during which
the human-nature relationship was undergoing a series of material and
philosophical revolutions. Naturalism examined these changes by using the
individual as a narrative focal point for historical, economic, and natural
shifts that extend beyond a single person, rather than taking individual
subjectivities or relationships among them as the narrative focus in their own
right (in contrast to naturalism's generic cousin, realism). 

My definition will necessarily dispute or revise several hegemonic definitions
of naturalism, from V. L. Parrington's in 1930 to more recent accounts near the
end of the twentieth century, while building to a much greater extent on
naturalist criticism of the past decade. Three major themes predominate in
early naturalist criticism, each of which I will hope to complicate:
determinism, the plot of decline, and a straightforward Darwinist or social
Darwinist interpretation of nature and social organization. Defining naturalism
by a simplistic philosophy of determinism in which the individual will is
entirely subsumed by external forces, I will argue, reflects more of the
concerns of early naturalist critics than those of the authors
themselves[^ln-determinism]. Defining the genre by determinism, a philosophy
with roots in scientific racism, risks inadvertently keeping naturalism
exclusively white, excluding authors for whom (as Morgan argues) determinism
more often describes a relationship of black communities to the white elite
than it does a "natural" law [@morgan_black_2012]. I will suggest "natural
embeddedness" as an alternative to the principle of environmental determinism,
a shift that I hope will offer both a more descriptive and more
epistemologically inclusive framework. The second trope sometimes used to
define the genre is the "plot of decline." Most notably articulated by Donald
Pizer, it has been powerfully challenged by more recent work that emphasizes
the compulsive repetition at the center of many women writers' work during the
period [@pizer_theory_1993, @fleissner_women_2004]. Finally, I want to suggest
that the tendency toward Darwinist evolutionary thinking in many naturalists is
merely one part of a larger commitment in naturalism to reconsidering the place
of the human in the natural and nature in the human.[^ln-fleissner-nature]

Moving beyond these hegemonic definitions of naturalism will allow me to reveal
the under-studied ecological relevance of many of the genre's major texts, but
it will also open up the genre to a wider purview of authors than the mostly
white, mostly male, mostly epistemologically homogeneous milieu of Stephen
Crane, Jack London, Frank Norris, and Theodore Dreiser. While I will devote
a chapter each to London and Norris, in the remaining two chapters, Charlotte
Perkins Gilman's *Herland* and two stories from Charles W. Chesnutt's *The
Conjure Woman* will also be read as "naturalist" in the sense I have defined
here.

To understand the place of literary naturalism within theorizations of the
Anthropocene, however, is likely to present less of a challenge than the
reverse. The question Chakrabarty poses in his influential essay "The Climate
of History: Four Theses," one of the core texts of Anthropocene studies in the
humanities, can be translated intact to the present topic. He asks, "How does
the crisis of climate change appeal to our sense of human universals while
challenging at the same time our capacity for historical understanding?" To
take the latter question first: if climate science has dismantled the
distinction between human and natural histories by refiguring the human as
a geological force, as Chakrabarty argues, that distinction had already been
troubled in literature by the naturalists' incorporation of the paradigms of
natural history into the contexts of human history and social life. This
assertion holds true even beyond a strictly ecological context, as in the
example of Dreiser's *The Financier*, a semi-historical novel that explains
historical events like the financial panic of 1873 as the product of characters
driven by evolutionary forces---that is, a theory of natural history.
[^ln-naturalists-animals] The other part of Chakrabarty's question dealing with
"our sense of human universals" is similarly resonant with most definitions of
naturalism, my own included. He suggests in the essay's conclusion that
"climate change poses for us a question of a human collectivity, an us,
pointing to a figure of the universal that escapes our capacity to experience
the world," arguing that "a global approach to politics" is therefore needed
that does not succumb to the "myth of a global identity"
[@chakrabarty_climate_2009 222]. Naturalism is unlikely to evade the trap of
the universal "human" identity, but its narrative technique of using the
individual subjectivity as a focal point for the experience of a larger whole
must be part of any history of understanding and representing the human on
a planetary scale. In short, two defining features of the genre, the
imbrication of human history with natural paradigms and the representation of
humanity at a scale well beyond the individual, are also defining features in
theorizations of the Anthropocene.

This does not, however, address the fundamental anachronism with which I began,
the imputation of Anthropocene thinking to literary periods not only before the
epoch's discovery, but before it is even said to have
begun.[^ln-anthropocene-wg] What distinguishes my proposed understanding of
Anthropocene literature from those of many previous studies is my focus on
literatures that either mount ecological critiques of those tendencies that
would eventually lead to humanity becoming a geological force or present an
understanding of nature that anticipates the changing status of the human. Most
discussion of Anthropocene literatures have defined their field of study as
hyper-contemporary. If we limit the scope, as some do, to novels directly
"about global warming" or climate change, only works that present an
*awareness* of climate change are even eligible---in other words, nothing
earlier than around 1990 [@trexler_anthropocene_2015].[^ln-periodization] As
Lawrence Buell suggests, however, projects that work "through exegesis of such
works of global warming imagination as exist" are merely one component (albeit
important) of how literary studies can engage the Anthropocene. Among the other
methodologies is a "reinterpretation of texts from precontemporary eras that
engage issues of anthropogenic climate change, even if not global warming
specifically"[^ln-method2]. I propose naturalism as an important piece of this
larger project, as it is a genre that was paying careful attention to the
human's place in nature, was doing so in the country where some of the most
destructive shifts were taking place, and began shortly before the first
scientific study relevant to climate change was conducted in Svante Arrhenius's
1896 study of the effects of coal on atmospheric temperatures
[@trexler_anthropocene_2015 2].

Although the focus of this project is on naturalism, its relevance as an
Anthropocene literature will come into greater focus in conversation with more
contemporary literature, especially "cli-fi" or "climate fiction" and
speculative fiction more generally. Indeed, though it will be dealt with
briefly and in broader literary-historical strokes, speculative fiction
provides a legacy for many of the concepts I find in naturalism and will offer
context throughout the project, especially in the introduction and conclusion.
Forms of environmental speculation persist from the beginning of SF through
present-day cli-fi: from Edgar Rice Burroughs's "Barsoom" novels (1912-1943) in
which Mars presents a figure of a dying planetary ecology, through Frank
Herbert's *Dune* (1965) that arose out of the early American environmentalist
movement, and into the present day, in which Kim Stanley Robinson's novels
continue to demonstrate the seriousness of the genre's contribution to
environmental thinking. The continuation of these themes as speculative fiction
quite probably explains why environmental speculation and futurity have
remained undiscussed in literary naturalism. The texts that exhibit speculation
most dramatically, Jack London's *The Scarlet Plague* and *The Iron Heel* and
Charlotte Perkins Gilman's *Herland*, are often read as speculative fiction
first, while their contribution to naturalism is set to the side. I will show
that these works can and must be both, but that their speculativeness
demonstrates a larger relevance of naturalism to the current crisis.

### Chapter I: The Farm at the End of the World: Jack London and the End of Capitalist Natures

The first chapter will argue that a critique of "capitalist natures" is central
to the naturalist post-apocalyptic novel, linking the crisis-prone nature of
capitalism with ecological catastrophe. This linkage of industry with the state
of the world ecology makes the naturalist crisis novel speak directly to the
concerns of the Anthropocene. Among the early disaster novels that take place
on the scale of the human species is Jack London's *The Scarlet Plague* (1912),
a speculative novel imagining the near-destruction of humanity by an epidemic.
This conceit provides London with a limit-case to test a theme developed
throughout his collected work: reading short stories such as a "To Build
a Fire" and agrarian novels such as *Burning Daylight*, I will trace the
development of the idea that human combination and specialization under
capitalism replace a more fundamental species-being[^ln-species-being] and
survival capacity by alienating the individual human from a direct relationship
to its environment. Providing for oneself through direct interaction with the
land is deeply important to being human in London's eyes, but in an urbanizing
world, doing so becomes less necessary or even possible. The post-apocalyptic
genre allows London to pit capitalist progress against the pure forms of the
human-in-nature and extra-human nature alike.

If, as Fredric Jameson tells us, "it is easier to imagine the end of the world
than the end of capitalism," *The Scarlet Plague* imagines the end of the world
*in order to* imagine the end of capitalism, picking up the thread of *Burning
Daylight* to imagine what a post-civilization reversion to species-being and
a direct relationship of the human with its environment might actually look
like. In the context of London's other major speculative work, *The Iron Heel*
(1908), *The Scarlet Plague* can be seen as a depiction of what will happen if
capitalist expansion is allowed to collapse upon itself instead of being
superceded by socialism, a demonstration of the essence that needs to be
regained as well as the primitivism and cruelty that must not be. London's
speculative turn is finally an ecological one insofar as he uses the
post-Apocalyptic scenario to imagine the human as an organism among organisms,
stripped of what it has made through combination and civilization. London's
early example of the post-apocalyptic novel inaugurates a trend of considering
the species as an object of improvement-through-ecological-embeddedness, in
which crisis becomes an occasion to rebuild the species in a more sustainable
mold.[^ln-post-apocalypse]  

### Chapter II: Garden Industries: Naturalism, Ecotopia, and Determinism

The post-apocalyptic subgenre hints at themes of rebuilding in naturalist
speculation, of *fixing* the fundamental contradictions of the naturalist
moment. The second chapter will consider these reconstructive and reparative
impulses directly, demonstrating that the naturalist philosophy of
environmental determinism was extended to form an "ecotopian" paradigm of
coevolution between a human society and the ecology in which it is embedded---a
concept of symbiotic codetermination that complicates the unidirectional
determinism that some critics of naturalism have argued defines the genre.
To this end, I will consider Charlotte Perkins Gilman's *Herland* (1915) both as
a naturalist text and as the founding text of the ecotopian subgenre, showing
that it uses the concept of carrying capacity to mount a critique of the
increasing scale that defines the Anthropocene.

Ecotopianism imagines social and physical structures that resolve the perceived
environmental crises of an historical moment. It tends to resolve the
contradictions of economic and ecological health by improving a system's
efficiency and elegance rather than expanding the system's scale, a direct
rejoinder to growth-based capitalism; this ethic of refinement is enforced by
strict geographic or political boundaries that make growth impossible. As a
result, these works use a combination of "degrowth" and steady-state systems to
simultaneously resolve social and environmental contradictions. Finally, an
ecotopian text forces human systems into complex interchange and codependence
with the organisms of their environment, but imagines ways in which doing so
can lead to the mutual flourishing of all species involved. 

In *Herland*, these characteristics arise in complex relation to naturalist
determinism. While in the classic naturalist text, the collection of "forces"
is so overwhelming as to make individual or collective resistance
impossible,[^ln-resistance-futile] Gilman suggests that by altering the
physical and economic structures of a society the path of determination can be
managed. This vision of managed codetermination, I will argue, is a result of
the ecotopian text's commitment to ecological management as a way of relating
to non-human nature. As such, it embodies one powerful environmentalist
response to the "end of nature" in the Anthropocene. But it also foregrounds
many of the ethical and philosophical challenges of degrowth, including state
attempts to control population growth and enforced localism.

### Chapter III: Nature without Science: Race, Epistemology, and Marginalization

My third chapter will consider the possibility of non-scientific epistemologies
in the purview of naturalism, arguing that limiting the definition of
naturalism to texts that enthusiastically accept Darwinism leaves out important
contributions to the genre by non-white authors and proponents of non-Western
epistemologies. Suggesting a concept of "natural embeddedness" to replace
"environmental determinism" in definitions of naturalism, I will argue that
considering Darwinism as merely one in a series of reconsiderations of the
human-nature relationship will both describe the naturalist project more
accurately and widen the purview of the field. It also addresses a need to
include environmentalist thinking from non-scientific epistemologies in our
responses to the Anthropocene, both use the full range of available responses
and to make sure that Chakrabarty's call for a new universalism does not
overwrite non-empiricist forms of knowledge. Simply put, naturalism and
environmentalism have both had a dual racial and epistemological problem, both
of which center on the question of whose environmental knowledge *counts* when
the definition of a human-nature relationship is at stake.

This chapter's central texts will be "The Goophered Grapevine" and "Po' Sandy,"
stories in Charles W. Chesnutt's *The Conjure Woman, and Other Conjure Tales*
(1899)[^ln-chesnutt]. The stories pose a direct confrontation of epistemologies
when a Northern agriculturalist encounters an understanding of ecological
embeddedness based in conjuration and hoodoo. Chesnutt puts hoodoo-based
environmental determinism in conflict with the agriculturalist's rationalist
epistemology through the vehicle of the Northerner's skepticism: each story is
presented as fact by Julius McAdoo, a former slave and narrator of the tales of
conjuration, but doubted by its recipients, and Julius is given a motive for
making each story up. Leaving the stories' veracity unresolvable calls into
question the types of knowledge practiced in the story's teller, but also its
doubter. Using this device, Chesnutt represents the discord between the two
groups as primarily over what counts as knowledge about nature in the context
of conflicting plans for land use.

Chesnutt is an early example of texts that use epistemological resistance to
scientism as part of an ecological argument---that is, resistance to a view of
science as the only valid form of knowledge and application of the scientific
method to non-scientific contexts. I will conclude by showing how these forms
of resistance in Chesnutt mirror those in the history of speculative fiction
and environmentalism.

### Chapter IV: Futures Speculation: Planetarity, Divergent Scale, and World(s) Systems

My final chapter will examine the role of financial futures in naturalist
environmental speculation, taking as its central texts Frank Norris's *The
Octopus* and *The Pit* to show how the rise of global finance provides a useful
narrative figure for simultaneously considering economic and ecological systems
on a global and planetary scale. In Norris's case, the semi-mystical,
semi-sentient character of "The Wheat" is a narrative mechanism that makes it
possible to depict the world ecology[^ln-world-ecology]. In *The Octopus*, the
figure of The Wheat lets Norris use a complex juxtaposition of narrative
scales, in which local events and struggles are motivated by global resource
networks, to compare the effects of economic and ecological "forces" on human
activity as individuals and a species. Though the novel's action is centered in
the San Joaquin Valley in California, the motivating events are all driven by
the changing price of wheat according to global distribution schemes. At the
same time, the novel goes out of its way to examine several different farming
techniques as they interact with these global markets---from sustainable crop
rotations to more exploitative methods that are compared to mining. The result
is that the novel's global sense of resource markets has visible effects on
local ecologies. In *The Pit*, Norris articulates the means by which these
markets are manipulated while showing the extent to which commodity futures
dematerialize the commodity itself---thereby allowing unlimited exploitation of
natural "resources." He uses The Wheat to depict the ecological effects of a
global market: it animates natural limitations themselves, the very limitations
that markets attempt always to exceed.

I will conclude by showing how this world-ecological thinking has been extended
in novels of terraformation, represented primarily (but not exclusively) by Kim
Stanley Robinson's *Mars Trilogy*---a trilogy of terraformation informed by
ecological thinking and with resonances in world-systems theory. I will argue
that terraformation is a useful figure for representing human alteration of a
planetary ecology, and that the narrative strategies used to depict
vastly different scales, developed in naturalist fiction, have provided a
methodology essential to representation in the Anthropocene.



[^ln-naturalists-animals]: Analogies to non-human organisms famously underscore
this incorporation of the human into natural paradigms throughout the genre,
such as passages on the "Mycteroperca Bonaci" (black grouper) and the
predator-prey relationship of a squid and a lobster in *The Financier*, or
Edith Wharton's analogy of a woman bound indelibly to traditional social roles
to "the Kentucky cave-fish, which had ceased to develop eyes because it had no
use for them" [@wharton_age_2008 58].

[^ln-anthropocene-wg]: At the time of writing, The Working Group on the
Anthropocene, the committee of the International Union of Geological Sciences
responsible for deciding whether the Antrhopocene will be an official
geological epoch, has recommended several criteria that would place the start
of the epoch around the middle of the twentieth century. Possible determining
criteria, from among a host of significant geological signals, include density
of chicken bones due to industrial farming, plastic pollutants, and residue
from nuclear testing.

[^ln-species-being]: "Species-being" was developed in Ludwig Feuerbach's
*Essence of Christianity* and extended considerably in Marx's theory of
alienation as he developed it in *The Philosophical and Economic Manuscripts of
1844*. In Marx's use, its general definition is activity that defines the
character of a species; for humans in particular, species-being is conscious
and spontaneous---i.e., non-alienated---production within a social context, or
production by and for a social group. In his furthest extension of the concept,
it even refers to the conscious development of human progress on the level of
the species. This concept is clearly useful in discussing London's engagement
with nature and Apocalypse, but it is also historically appropriate due to
London's well known interest in Marx and socialism. 

[^ln-burning-daylight]: In *Burning Daylight*, the alienation process is traced
through the titular character's lost connection with the Yukon as he moves into
the financial world of urban life and futures speculation. Through Daylight's
struggles, London argues that escaping the system of capitalism and exchange is
the only way to regain this connection with the environment and, therefore,
with one's own species-being. 

[^ln-world-ecology]: This term condenses a long-running discussion at the
intersection of economics, geography, history, and ecology. Jason W. Moore
defines it as "the process through which civilizations, themselves forces of
nature, are caught up in the co-production of life"; capitalism is one such
world-ecology, "joining the accumulation of capital, the pursuit of power, and
the co-production of nature in dialectical unity" [@moore_capitalism_2015 3].

[^ln-post-apocalypse]: George R. Stewart's *Earth Abides* (1948) extends
London's premise with a more nuanced and realistic view of non-human nature
while also echoing naturalist terminology and rhetoric. Octavia Butler's
*Parable* novels (1998 and 2000) conceive of cultural disaster and cultural
rebuilding in the place of physical tragedy, using ecological consciousness as
the centerpiece of cultural reinvention. Finally, Atwood's *MaddAddam Trilogy*
(2003, 2009, and 2013) juxtaposes cultural and Promethean forms of rebuilding,
turning the ecological reinvention of the human into both the disaster and the
means of recovery from it.

[^ln-determinism]: Cf. @fleissner_women_2004.

[^ln-fleissner-nature]:  This last argument will be indebted to a more recent
naturalist critic, Jennifer Fleissner, who argues that naturalism's larger
project is to pose a "serious confrontation with the meanings of 'nature''s
changing status in the modern world" [@fleissner_women_2004 7].

[^ln-periodization]: Others, though they attend to the ways in which
contemporary novels may adapt their "self-positioning as temporal artifacts of
their genre as they become novels of the Anthropocene," do not attempt
a repositioning of any earlier literatures in response to the new epoch's
discovery [@marshall_what_2015].

[^ln-method2]: Projects like Ken Hiltner's "Coal in the Age of Milton" and,
I would add, Anahid Nersessian's *Utopia, Limited*, both of which put periods
far removed from the present in contact with the contemporary crisis they
precipitated[@buell_ecocriticism:_2011, @hiltner_coal_2011,
@nersessian_utopia_2015].

[^ln-chesnutt]: Although Chesnutt is often read as a realist, he has been
included in some discussions of naturalism that attempt to expand the field,
and he meets the criteria of a naturalist text as I define them above.
