---
geometry: margin=1in
---

### Introduction: Ecotopia in General

I define the ecotopian imagination as the narrative construction of spaces that
create speculative social ecologies. Ecotopian spaces often share common
characteristics: social, economic, or (and?) ecological closure; an attention
to energy throughput[^ln-throughput] that includes human actors; and response
to a larger, contemporaneous political or social regime or movement. They often
also share formal features: ecotopian spaces are often sequestered in their own
sections,[^ln-narrative-sequester] and entrances and exits from such spaces
often have a transformative or wish-fulfilling effect on plot and characters.
Above all, ecotopian spaces articulate an environmental (if not always
environmentalist) perspective through imagined material. Reading such spaces
can reveal an important spatial aspect to a given text's imaginative
capacities, but reading many of them historically can offer something larger to
environmentalism and the environmental humanities. An implicit political
argument underlies this project: that under conditions of impending crisis,
contemporary environmentalism needs a utopian imaginary, and reading for
ecotopian spaces can reveal material for this imaginary in unexpected places. 

Though it might appear trans-historical, the ecotopian imagination in American
literature is firmly historically situated, emerging when the frontier
disappears (according to the U.S. Census Bureau, in 1890). Indeed, the history
of the narrative ecotopian imagination in the United States is inseparable from
the dialectically related figures of frontier and crisis (apocalypse?), figures
that usually define the two sides of an exploitative relationship, be it
colonial, economic, or gendered. The frontier is an ever-shifting promise of
the freedom to invent structures anew, beyond the bounds of space that has
already been determined. While a naive conception of the frontier might
envision it as the border between civilization and empty space, a more
contemporary one would note that the frontier concept causes space *to be
emptied* so that it can be filled anew, opening it to the intervention of an
unfettered spatial imaginary. *Crises* emphasize (and therefore recognize) the
destruction that is required to enable invention, but they do not permit the
frontier's imagined freedom to build something entirely anew. Rather, anything
new that results from a crisis is built "in the shell of the old," as it were.
The creation of new spaces and the social systems they contain is a function of
either model---the frontier's "creative destruction" or the post-crisis
creation that is *forced* by destruction; *which* model is determined by one's
relationship to distributions of power, production, and abundance.

These concepts might apply to any examination of utopian literature or
politics, but the ecotopian imagination uniquely privileges the role of human
and social ecologies in this interaction, targeting the
"metabolism"[^ln-metabolism] between human and non-human natures as the initial
site of re-imagination and praxis. The authors in question, in other words,
imagine transformations in the material interactions between human and
non-human natures that lead to transformations in distributive and social
interactions among humans. The "closure" that Fredric Jameson identifies as
crucial to utopian politics and literature[^ln-closure] takes on a new cast in
its ecotopian form. All other forms of closure in an ecotopian schema arise
from the primary creation of a closed, steady-state regional ecosystem. This
vision of human and non-human systems that are so closely yoked creates a
relationship of mutual determination and complex coevolution, not only
challenging what has been called the "master dualism" of nature and
culture,[^ln-master-dualism] but re-imagining the role of social ecology in
politics and revolutionary praxis.

This introduction will outline and situate the ecotopian imagination
theoretically, at the cross-section of the Environmental Humanities, the
discussion of utopian literature and politics in Marxist literary theory, and
discussions of internal colonialism in the history of the United States and its
literature. It will then address the fundamental anachronism of the project's
conception---the comparison of American Literary Naturalism from the 1890s to
American Speculative Fiction in the 1990s---with two guiding schemata. First,
this introduction will outline the movement from the *lost frontier* of the
1890s through the displacement onto the *high frontier* in midcentury SF,
reframing the dominant modes of both temporal bounds in terms of the
frontier/crisis dyad. And second, it will delineate the mode of what I might
call "reading speculatively," a displacement of the quality of
"speculativeness" in "speculative fiction" from the inherent attributes of a
text to the reading practices it inspires. To read speculatively is to read for
traces that define the world envisioned by the text---whether that means the
natural laws by which it imagines a world to be governed, as in the
deterministic forces of literary naturalism, or the traces of physical
structure and infrastructure that define an imagined space. The introduction
will conclude by outlining the individual chapters.

### Chapter I: Frontiers: Ecotopian Naturalism and Ecological Praxis

This chapter will examine the ways that transformations in the ecology of an
ecotopian space determine the shape of social systems and narrative form in the
rest of the work that contains it. It will do so by juxtaposing the
environments of a classic naturalist plot of determination (represented by the
work of Frank Norris) with a less recognized form of what I am calling "utopian
naturalism," most clearly exemplified in Charlotte Perkins Gilman's *Herland*.

In Norris's work, social systems are governed by natural laws that lead to
predictable ends---"predictable" because the systems governing those ends are
static and definitively closed to praxis and mutual determination. Despite this
apparent stasis, there is an ecotopian imagination present in Norris's works,
but its expressions are always fleeting, reigned in by the inexorable laws of
capital. The reasons for this ephemerality are fundamentally related to a
gendered view of the frontier. Norris's masculine ecotopian imagination is
bound to the domination of a frontier, but as he is writing *after* the
frontier's disappearance, these ecotopian spaces are never more than a step
ahead of the totalizing capitalist system: without a frontier, there is (as for
McTeague) nowhere to run. 

Gilman's ecotopian space is based in a rejection of this absolute
determination. She does not dispute that environment and natural laws are
deterministic, but she asserts a greater degree of human control over the
forces that determine. She imagines a space to which the frontier and its
implicit modus operandi of domination are irrelevant, short-circuiting the
expansionist view of space that they rely on with a vision of social,
historical, economic, and (of course) ecological closure. This closure,
however, results from a would-be apocalyptic event rather than relying on the
absent frontier (the country is isolated by natural disaster and war). The
combination of closure and management of the environment establish a vision of
ecological praxis that challenges mainstream naturalism's naive understanding
of determinism with a more dialectical model.

#### Probable texts:

- Gilman: Herland, "The Yellow Wallpaper," 
- Norris: The Octopus, The Pit, McTeague

### Chapter II: Cliff Cities: History, Cultural Appropriation, and Cultural Reclamation

This chapter will examine Willa Cather's depiction of Ácoma Pueblo ruins in
*Death Comes for the Archbishop* and *The Professor's House* alongside writers
like Leslie Marmon Silko and Simon Ortiz (probably? I need to do a lot of
reading here) to argue that the ecotopian imagination can be a means of
resistance to historical relations of colonization and production as well as
history itself as a concept. The basic tension of this chapter will be the
frontier mentality of cultural appropriation and the apocalyptic motif of
cultural reclamation as inverse forces that generate anti-historical ecotopian
spaces. 

In Cather's novels, Outland and Latour are both readers of culture as it is
expressed in infrastructure---and not just readers, but *rereaders* who take
these infrastructural signs and translate them for their own utopian ends.  Out
of the traces of Ácoma Pueblo ruins (or ruins based on them), they create
ecotopian spaces that either permit the queering of domestic labor, in
Outland's case, or resolve the tension between colonial conquest and religious
conversion in Latour's. The attempt to live within or recreate frontier
conditions through someone else's culture relies on a rewriting of
world-historical events as well as individual origins, making these forms of
ecotopia both obsessed with history and fundamentally ahistorical. 

The inverse of Cather's frontier ecotopia can be found in the writings of
Pueblo authors, among them Leslie Marmon Silko and Simon Ortiz. If the
ecotopian imagination in Cather's novels is a meditation on appropriative and
ahistorical constructions of culture-through-environment, the Pueblo writers in
this chapter offer a vision of ecotopia as a response to crisis and total
appropriation, in which place-based cultures must be reconstructed far removed
from the temporal and spatial bounds in which they arise. In Silko's *Almanac
of the Dead*, for example, the titular Almanac must be reconstructed out of a
combination of maintained fragments and modern additions if it is to form a
coherent whole. As scholars of American Indian literature like Joni Adamson
have argued, this adaptive and inventive cultural paradigm is also expressed
through many Pueblo figurations of the garden: such a garden is a space in
which the hybridity of human and natural history is acknowledged and accounted
for, even, implicitly, when that history is colonial and appropriative. The
"apocalyptic" counterpoint to the frontier of appropriation is the remaking of
a place-based social ecology and culture despite destruction and displacement.

\*\*Note: I need to do more reading in these Pueblo works to determine exactly
what spaces I will read---but other scholarship leads me to believe this won't
be a problem.

#### Probable texts:

- Cather: Death Comes for the Archbishop, Professor's House
- Leslie Marmon Silko: Ceremony, Almanac of the Dead(?)
- Simon Ortiz: Selected Works (?) 

### Chapter III: Plantations: Social Ecologies and Historical Trauma

This chapter is still under development while I revisit the texts. Ideally, I'd
like to look at former plantations in post-Reconstruction Southern literature
as an environment in which the ecotopian imagination struggles against the
rifts of historical trauma. This perspective would allow me to compare the
exploitative, resource-based view of human and non-human nature with human
ecologies represented through human-nature hybridity in texts like Chesnutt's
*Conjure Woman* and Toomer's *Cane*. Hybridity in Chesnutt and Toomer can be
read as a metaphor for the human and social ecologies that arise out of
conditions of forcible bondage to the land. In the post-Reconstruction period,
as DuBois shows, assimilation of formerly enslaved communities into the system
of capitalist agriculture often led merely to a different type of exploitation
through predatory loans and land rents. In response to this new form
exploitation, post-Reconstruction authors use hybridity to reimagine, in
post-bondage conditions, the extra-economic social ecology that arose as a form
of resistance under conditions of bondage. While it does not attempt to
foreclose historical trauma, it does seek to imagine a continuation of
place-based life beyond it.

The disappearance of the frontier for the post-slave-holding class means having
to acknowledge complicity in historical trauma; the ecotopian vision that
results must offer a counterpoint to the exploitative environment of the
plantation, which persists through legal inheritance of the fruits of that
exploitation. In other words, the ecotopian space here is one that successfully
hides or erases, making complicity disappear in the construction of a space to
which ownership is irrelevant. The tension between landscapes and documents in
Faulkner's "The Bear" is exemplary: the utopian function of "wilderness," as as
a place that is unownable and illegible, is to blot out awareness of a form of
ownership that cannot be countenanced.  Ownership of land and people is based
in legibility, as is dramatized in the narrative of reading ledgers and
historical chronicles. The gradual becoming-legible of the wilderness
culminates in its destruction, seeming to contrast the role of the written word
in property and ownership with the unknowability of the "wilderness" in its
idealized, American sense. But prior to the loss of the hunting ground, the
relationship with the land seems to cause a suspension of historical tension
and trauma. The very illegibility of the space, then, forms an extra-legal (and
therefore extra-ownership and extra-enslavement) space in which historical
crimes can be temporarily forgotten. 

#### Possible texts:

- Chesnutt: *The Conjure Woman*
- Faulkner: Absalom, "The Bear"
- Toomer: *Cane*

### Chapter IV: Parks (/Neighborhoods?/Tenements?): The Ecotopian Imagination in the City

This chapter will probably address some of the issues of enclosure I brought up
in my orals conversations, but it may also address some of the following: urban
reform; garden cities; city parks; narrations of black migration north in the
twentieth century; displacement of European peasant cultures onto an urban
landscape. This text is essentially a placeholder while I develop my thinking
on *Call It Sleep* and *Jews Without Money*, possibly alongside narratives of
black migration from the south to northern urban enclaves like Harlem (texts
TBD). 

The main thing I'm pursuing in this chapter is how agrarian and rural social
ecologies, when displaced into urban conditions, require an ecotopian
reformation of space if they are to survive. In differentiating these moments
from the "urban pastoral" and the "ghetto pastoral," I will also have an
occasion to differentiate the ecotopian imagination from the pastoral in
general. Because the most obviously "environmental" moments in Roth's and
Gold's novels are essentially pastoral, however, it's unclear whether they'll
be usable except in establishing the urban ecotopia negatively against the
urban pastoral. This chapter may therefore end up being less "literary" than
others, engaging more with theoretical texts and discussions of relevant issues
in urban planning. The "garden city," for example, had a major influence on
late-nineteenth- and early-twentieth-century urban planning and architecture,
and may provide a useful angle from which to approach urban ecology in
literature. The role of city parks in New York City immigrant novels (Gold) and
Harlem-centric novels could also be set against the discourse around parks in
urban planning. More research is required at this point to determine which
would be most viable.

#### Possible texts:

- Henry Roth, *Call It Sleep*
- Michael Gold, *Jews Without Money*

### Postscript/Chapter V: Nature Beyond Earth: Ecotopia on the High Frontier

The central tension of this chapter will be the concept of "nature" implied by
the ecotopian imagination, ambiguous as it is on the division between human and
non-human nature and the naturalness of a "managed ecology". On one hand, the
totally artificial closed system of the spaceship puts philosophical pressure
on the role of "nature" in natural systems that are created or managed by
humans. This issue takes a wider relevance in the anthropocene, when there is
arguably no "non-human nature": the reach of the human species is too broad to
allow it. The artificiality of the spaceship and the planet come together in
the vision of "spaceship earth" that became a major paradigm of sustainability
in the last two decades of the twentieth century. Further, encounters with
extra-terrestrial natures demands a reevaluation of the hierarchies according
to which concepts of nature have been historically constructed. The loci of the
spaceship and extra-terrestrial planet finally becomes test cases for the
possibility of determination in complex systems: time and again in ecotopian
novels of the high frontier, the ultimate limits of human management and
domination are exposed as determined systems come into contact with systems
that resist determination. It is necessary to discuss the science-fictional
wing of the ecotopian imagination to show that "nature" in an ecotopian space
always exists in a tension between the conscious interaction with systems that
go beyond the human and the limits of human control in non-human systems.

#### Possible texts:

- Kim Stanley Robinson: Mars Trilogy, 2312, Aurora?
- Octavia Butler: Dawn
- John Varley: Titan
- Robert A. Heinlein: The Moon is a Harsh Mistress, Farmer in the Sky


<!--- ### Notes --->

[^ln-throughput]: *The Dictionary of Environment and Conservation* defines
throughput as "Output relative to input; the amount that passes through a
system from input to output."

[^ln-metabolism]: I mean "metabolism" in the sense used by Marx and elaborated
by John Bellamy Foster (among others). 

[^ln-closure]: See the first chapter of Jameson's *Archaeologies of the
Future*. 

[^ln-master-dualism]: See Val Plumwood's *Feminism and the Mastery of Nature*.

[^ln-narrative-sequester]: See, for example, the "Tom Outland's Story" section
of Cather's *The Professor's House*. 

