---
geometry: margin=1in
bibliography: prospectus.bib
---

### Working Title: Environmental Speculation in American Literary Naturalism

Consider a series of novels in which the human population of a planet struggles
to meet its basic needs because the crop they rely on for sustenance has
started to *fight back*. This plant is not supposed to grow there in the first
place: transported from another world, it has gained a foothold in a foreign
environment thanks to hubristic agricultural coercion and controlled mutation,
but before long it has come to span continents. Before long, it seems to have
developed a spirit of its own. The plant has whims, and the planet's human
population transforms its behavior to match them. A powerful financier attempts
to dominate the plant with market forces, despite the warnings of those who
fear it; when his life and his career are destroyed, the novel makes clear, it
is because this unmasterable force has asserted its almost mystical power in
retribution. Another would-be master of the plant is crushed beneath a wave of
its processed form, the plant's power asserted once again through sheer
physicality. On this planet dominated by a non-human life form, in the "little,
isolate group of human insects, misery, death, and anguish spun like a wheel of
fire." And yet, "*the [plant] remained*. Untouched, unassailable, undefiled,
that mighty world-force, that nourisher of nations, wrapped in Nirvanic calm,
indifferent to the human swarm, gigantic, resistless, moved onward in its
appointed grooves" (Norris *The Octopus* 448).

This summary might sound like an advertisement for a sci-fi series in which
a monstrous plant controls a distant planet, perhaps an allegory for climate
change and our abused planet. In fact, the planet is Earth, the plant is wheat,
and the series of novels is comprised of *The Octopus* (1899) and *The Pit*
(1901), Frank Norris's classic novels of American literary naturalism. Such
confusion is possible for two reasons. First, because in many naturalist
novels, environmental critique takes an inherently speculative form. And
second, because environmentalist speculative fiction has continued many of the
narrative strategies and philosophical commitments of literary naturalism.
While a conversation about the speculative nature of naturalism has begun in
recent studies of the genre, the unique function of speculation in its
environmental commitments remains unexamined. This environmental speculation is
significant from the perspective of Anthropocene studies because it allows
naturalism to be considered as an early form of "cli-fi" (short for "climate
fiction," and sometimes called "Anthropocene fiction"[^ln-trexler]). Doing so
casts literary naturalism in a new and relevant light while also providing us
with a broader history of a literary movement that is often misconstrued as
merely contemporary.

My dissertation will discuss environmental speculation in American literary
naturalism both as a mode of proto-environmentalist thought and as a precursor
to an environmentalist strain of speculative fiction that would develop over
the rest of the century. By "environmental speculation" I mean the narrative
construction of possible environmental futures or hypothetical alternatives to
the dominant social ecology of the novel's historical moment. As naturalism is
a genre that deals heavily with the workings of capitalism and finance,
however, I also want to open the term up to consideration in terms of "futures
speculation" and the environmental impact of financial markets---particularly
in works by Jack London and Frank Norris in which futures speculation is
a major narrative preoccupation, but also in works by Charlotte Perkins Gilman
and Charles W. Chesnutt in which critiques of nature under capitalism are more
subtle. In each chapter, I will use mainlines of environmentalist speculative
fiction as starting points to discuss the concepts' origins in literary
naturalism. While the focus of the project is on literary naturalism,
contextualizing the genre as an early form of Anthropocene fiction will require
this wider context. 

<!--Relevance of cli-fi-->Studies of fiction related to the Anthropocene are
often myopic, limiting their scope to cli-fi, or works composed since the boom
in popular awareness of climate change. Its path somewhat cleared by the
emergence of Anthropocene studies more generally, cli-fi has found an academic
reception commensurable with its retail success.[^ln-cli-fi] Before there was
cli-fi, though, there was a longstanding commitment to environmentalist thought
in speculative fiction, most notoriously in Frank Herbert's *Dune* (1965) and
running through the modern era in the work of Kim Stanley Robinson. Cli-fi is
merely a recent entry in this tradition---only now understood through the lens
of a single overwhelming environmental issue. A deep history of cli-fi requires
us to venture well before human consciousness of anthropogenic climate change
and into the rapid industrialization and financialization that led to
it.[^ln-anthropocene-dates] 
 
<!--Statement of argument: literary naturalism is the predecessor of cli-fi,
but its own form of environmental speculation is understudied-->But the
literary and philosophical genealogy of the genre is more complex than it
appears, even with this expanded definition, and requires a discussion of
another genre entirely: the roots of cli-fi's environmental speculation can be
found in the tradition of American literary naturalism. Not only can, but
*should* be: naturalism was striving to represent the interactions of human and
natural systems when those interactions were ushering in the Anthropocene. If
we only consider as cli-fi or Anthropocene fictions those works that occur
after the discovery of anthropogenic climate change we will study only the
literature responding to the effects of the crisis, overlooking perceptive
narrative critiques of its causes. In other words, naturalist critiques of
twentieth-century social ecologies take on a new significance when we recognize
that they were writing at a critical moment in the environmental history of
America and the planet.

<!--defining naturalism-->This generic linkage may come as a surprise to many
critics of naturalism and speculative fiction alike, because naturalism's
relevance to ecocriticism and its habit of speculation have both been
understudied. When the generic term was coined, "naturalism" usually referred
to a common cluster of authors---Jack London, Theodore Dreiser, Frank Norris,
and Stephen Crane---and critics frequently juxtaposed naturalism's focus on
characters operating within a system of deterministic forces with realism's
focus on character, interiority, and individual agency
[@mitchell_determined_1989 xii]. Since study of the genre began, it has been
notorious for the proliferation of attempts to define its object. Vernon Louis
Parrington associates it strongly with realism, only marked by a greater degree
of "pessimism" and a focus on characters less affluent than those of the
average realist novel [qtd. in @applegate_american_2002 xviii]. Others, like
Lee Clark Mitchell and Donald Pizer, find a more philosophical basis for the
definition of the genre, emphasizing its investigation of deterministic
principles and considering how this investigation influences its class politics
[@mitchell_determined_1989 xii-xv, @applegate_american_2002 xviii-xx]. Most
critics accept as defining factors the presence of deterministic forces and an
application of evolutionary theory to human behavior. These older purviews of
literary naturalism that limit themselves to likes of London and Norris have
begun to be expanded by critics who include women and authors of color
erroneously left out of the naturalist conversation, such as Jennifer Fleissner
in *Women, Compulsion, and Modernity*. 

Building on work from across the spectrum of these definitions. This study will
consider as relevant to the naturalist discussion any American novels from
about 1890 through the Second World War that engage in some manner with
contemporary scientific and evolutionary theory to describe human behavior,
emphasize external events and physical conditions over individual agency as the
determinants of plot and narrative, and pose a "serious confrontation with the
meanings of "nature"'s changing status in the modern world"
[@fleissner_women_2004 7]. 

<!--new naturalisms-->None of these definitions of naturalism, however, have
attended to the union of speculation and environmentalist critique that
I propose here. Nascent discussions of naturalism's purview and legacy *have*
begun to note the continuum of naturalist fiction and speculative fiction, with
one recent article defining Richard Jeffries's *After London* as a form of
"speculative naturalism" [@plotz_speculative_2015] and a recent special issue
of *Studies in American Naturalism* devoted to exploring the two genres' shared
commitments. While these existing studies provide support for a consideration
of naturalism and SF in the same study, none explore the way that speculation
is used to further naturalism's proto-environmentalist commitments, which is
where the philosophical project of the genres most closely align.
<!--parameters of my project--> I will explore this link across the spectrum of
texts that are considered relevant to American literary naturalism, including
works that are obviously speculative and those in which the speculative nature
is less foregrounded. My chapters will be organized according to sub-generic
and thematic trajectories, defined by authors from both poles, including: from
Jack London through George R. Stewart, Octavia Butler, and Margaret Atwood;
from Charlotte Perkins Gilman through Ernest Callenbach and Kim Stanley
Robinson; from Charles W. Chesnutt through Octavia Butler and Ursula K. Le
Guin; and from Frank Norris through Kim Stanley Robinson. Each of these
connections and logics will be outlined in detail below.

### Chapter I: The Farm at the End of the World: Jack London and the End of Capitalist Natures

The first chapter will argue that a critique of "capitalist natures" is central
to the history of the post-apocalyptic novel, a tendency with roots in American
literary naturalism's generic history and philosophical underpinnings. Among
the early disaster novels on the scale of the human species is Jack London's
*The Scarlet Plague* (1912), a speculative novel imagining the near-destruction
of humanity by a quick-acting and fatal epidemic. This conceit provides London
with a limit-case to test a theme developed throughout his collected work:
reading short stories such as a "To Build a Fire" and agrarian novels such as
*Burning Daylight*, I will trace the development of the idea that human
combination and specialization under capitalism replace a more fundamental
species-being[^ln-species-being] and survival capacity by alienating the
individual human from a direct relationship to its environment. Providing for
oneself through direct interaction with the land is deeply important to being
human in London's eyes, but in an urbanizing world, doing so becomes less
necessary or even possible. The post-apocalyptic genre allows London to pit
capitalist progress against the pure forms of the human-in-nature and
extra-human nature alike.

In *Burning Daylight*, for example, the alienation process is traced through
the titular character's lost connection with the Yukon as he moves into the
financial world of urban life and futures speculation. Through Daylight's
struggles, London argues that escaping the system of capitalism and exchange is
the only way to regain this connection with the environment and, therefore,
with one's own species-being. If, as Fredric Jameson tells us, "it is easier to
imagine the end of the world than the end of capitalism," *The Scarlet Plague*
imagines the end of the world *in order to* imagine the end of capitalism,
picking up the thread of *Burning Daylight* to imagine what a post-civilization
reversion to species-being and a direct relation to environment might actually
look like. In the context of London's other major speculative work, *The Iron
Heel* (1908), *The Scarlet Plague* can be seen as a depiction of what will
happen if capitalist expansion is allowed to collapse upon itself instead of
being superceded by socialism, a demonstration of the essence that needs to be
regained as well as the primitivism and cruelty that must not be. London's
speculative turn is finally an ecological one insofar as he uses the
post-Apocalyptic scenario to imagine the human as an organism among organisms,
stripped of what it has made through combination and civilization.

The rest of the chapter will consider the development of this thread of
argument in an ecology-focused strand of the genre through the present day. The
genre remains interested in considering the species as an object of
improvement-through-ecological-embeddedness, in which near-apocalypse becomes
an occasion to rebuild the species in a more sustainable mold. George R.
Stewart's *Earth Abides* (1948) extends London's premise with a more nuanced
and realistic view of non-human nature while also echoing naturalist
terminology and rhetoric.[^ln-stewart-london] Octavia Butler's *Parable* novels
(1998 and 2000) conceive of cultural disaster and cultural rebuilding in the
place of physical tragedy, using ecological consciousness as the centerpiece of
cultural reinvention. Finally, Atwood's *MaddAddam Trilogy* (2003, 2009, and
2013) juxtaposes cultural and Promethean forms of rebuilding, turning the
ecological reinvention of the human into both the disaster and the means of
recovery from it.

### Chapter II: Garden Industries: Naturalism, Ecotopia, and Determinism

The latter bounds of the post-apocalyptic genre emphasize rebuilding, *fixing*
the fundamental contradictions of the moment in which they are written---a
strange convention for a genre defined by acts of total destruction. The second
chapter will consider these reconstructive and reparative impulses directly,
demonstrating that the naturalist philosophy of environmental determinism was
extended to form an "ecotopian" paradigm of coevolution between a human society
and the ecology in which it is embedded---a concept of symbiotic
codetermination that complicates the unidirectional determinism that some
critics of naturalism have argued defines the genre. I will consider Charlotte
Perkins Gilman's *Herland* (1915) both as a naturalist text and as the founding
text of the ecotopian subgenre, comparing it with Ernest Callenbach's
*Ecotopia* (1975) and Kim Stanley Robinson's ecotopian works (*The Mars
Trilogy* and *Aurora* especially). 

Some common features define ecotopianism across the stages of its development.
They imagine social and physical structures that resolve the perceived
environmental crises of the moment. Their resolutions are defined by improving
a system's efficiency and elegance rather than expanding the system's scale,
a direct rejoinder to growth-based capitalism; this ethic of refinement is
enforced by strict geographic or political boundaries that make growth
impossible. As a result, these works use a combination of "degrowth" and
steady-state systems to simultaneously resolve social and environmental
contradictions. Finally, an ecotopian text forces human systems into
complex interchange and codependence with the organisms of their environment,
but imagines ways in which doing so can lead to the mutual flourishing of all
species involved. 

All of these characteristics, however, arise in complex relation to naturalist
determinism. While in the classic naturalist text, the collection of "forces"
is so overwhelming as to make individual or collective resistance
impossible,[^ln-resistance-futile] this utopian strain of naturalism imagines
that by altering the physical and economic structures of a society the path of
determination can be managed. This vision of managed codetermination, I will
argue, is a result of the ecotopian text's commitment to ecological management
as a way of relating to non-human nature. I will compare this tendency in three
historical moments to show how ecotopianism changes in response to shifting
views of environmental crises: the naturalist moment (1915, *Herland*), in
which the perceived tragedy is overproduction; the consumerist moment (1975,
*Ecotopia*), in which overconsumption predominates; and the neoliberal moment
(1993-1996, *The Mars Trilogy*), in which the conflict between scientism,
capitalism, and conservationism poses ecological management as a site of
contested utopian impulses. I will ultimately suggest that attending to
ecotopian desires articulated across several historical moments can contribute
to an historical understanding of U.S. environmentalism beyond articulated
movements and institutional history.


### Chapter III: Nature without Science: Epistemological Resistance and Generic Marginalization

My third chapter will consider the possibility of non-scientific epistemologies
in the purview of naturalism and SF, arguing that limiting the definition of
naturalism to texts that enthusiastically accept Darwinism and SF to texts that
commit to the scientific method leaves out important contributions to both
genres. Juxtaposing scientific and non-scientific versions of environmental
determinism in a naturalist context, for example, we can test the limits of
some of the genre's fundamental philosophical premises when they are applied
beyond its "traditional" cultural and epistemological purview. 

This chapter's central texts will be "The Goophered Grapevine" and "Po' Sandy,"
stories in Charles W. Chesnutt's *The Conjure Woman, and Other Conjure Tales*
(1899); although Chesnutt is often read as a realist, he has been included in
some discussions of naturalism that attempt to expand the field, and he meets
the criteria of a naturalist text as I define them above. The stories pose
a direct confrontation of epistemologies when a Northern agriculturalist
encounters an understanding of ecological embeddedness based in conjuration and
hoodoo. Chesnutt puts hoodoo-based environmental determinism in conflict with
the agriculturalist's rationalist epistemology through the vehicle of the
Northerner's skepticism: each story is presented as fact by Julius McAdoo,
a former slave and narrator of the tales of conjuration, but doubted by its
recipients, and Julius is given a motive for making each story up. Leaving the
stories' veracity unresolvable calls into question the types of knowledge
practiced in the story's teller, but also its doubter. Using this device,
Chesnutt represents the discord between the two groups as primarily over what
counts as knowledge about nature in the context of conflicting plans for land
use. In "The Goophered Grapevine," the fate of the plants, inhabitants of the
vineyard, and agricultural schemes involving either depend on the existence of
a goopher placed on the land years ago, and therefore on the ability of
individual humans to be fully embedded in their immediate environment. In "Po'
Sandy," a slave's "escape" by turning into a tree is set alongside Julius's
(possible) attempt to reserve a space for a black religious group as parallel
forms of resistance. Chesnutt's speculative act is therefore not focused on the
future of the environment itself, as in some of this study's other core texts;
rather, he creates a conflict of forms of knowledge to consider how conflicting
conceptions of nature will coincide with land-use conflicts  in the
post-Reconstruction South. This debate over the changing status of nature---to
paraphrase Fleissner's definition of naturalism---is only made possible by the
irreconcilable conflict of these forms of knowledge. 

Chesnutt is an early example of texts that use epistemological resistance to
scientism as part of an ecological argument. I will relate Chesnutt's stories
to Octavia Butler's *Parable* series and Ursula K. Le Guin's *Always Coming
Home*, both of which use alternative epistemologies as the basis of an
ecological future.

### Chapter IV: The Intergalactic Spatial Fix: Planetarity, Scale, and World(s) Systems

My final chapter will examine the role of the global imagination in naturalist
environmental speculation, taking as its central text Frank Norris's unfinished
*Epic of the Wheat* (*The Octopus*, *The Pit*, and the never-started *The
Wolf*) to ask how the rise of the global economy gives rise to speculation as
a mode of thinking about the planet as a whole. In Norris's case, the
semi-mystical, semi-sentient character of "The Wheat" is a narrative mechanism
that makes it possible to depict the world ecology,[^ln-world-ecology] an
intersection of economic and ecological forces on a global scale. In *The
Octopus*, the figure of The Wheat lets Norris use a complex juxtaposition of
narrative scales, in which local events and struggles are motivated by global
resource networks, to compare the effects of economic and ecological "forces"
on human lives. Though the action is centered in the San Joaquin Valley in
California, the motivating events are all driven by the changing price of wheat
according to global distribution schemes. At the same time, the novel goes out
of its way to examine several different farming techniques as they interact
with these global markets---from sustainable crop rotations to more
exploitative methods that are compared to mining. The result is that the
novel's global sense of resource markets has visible effects on local
ecologies. In *The Pit*, Norris articulates the means by which these markets
are manipulated while showing the extent to which commodity futures
dematerialize the commodity itself---thereby allowing unlimited exploitation of
natural "resources." He uses The Wheat to depict the ecological effects of
a global market: it animates natural limitations themselves, the very
limitations that markets attempt always to exceed.

I will conclude by showing how this world-ecological thinking in naturalism
leads directly to narratives of terraformation, represented primarily (but not
exclusively) by Kim Stanley Robinson's *Mars Trilogy*---a trilogy of
terraformation informed by ecological thinking and with resonances in
world-systems theory. I will argue that terraformation narratives arise as
a response to the crisis fears inherent in planetary consciousness, and that
the narrative strategies used to depict vastly different scales are consistent
from literary naturalism to contemporary speculative fiction.


[^ln-trexler]: See Adam @trexler_anthropocene_2015's book of the same name
(2015).

[^ln-cli-fi]: While much of the early discussion of the genre took place in
commercial and trade publications, including *Kirkus*, *The Guardian*, and *The
New Yorker*, in 2015 several academic books were released on the topic, with
more likely to come, and a cursory search for syllabi with the keywords
"climate change" or "Anthropocene" yields many hits. For the trade
publication history, see @trexler_anthropocene_2015 7-8. Recent works on
fiction in the Anthropocene includes @trexler_anthropocene_2015,
@clark_ecocriticism_2015,@wark_molecular_2015,@bristow_anthropocene_2015. 

[^ln-anthropocene-dates]: Consider, for example, the recent news that the
Anthropocene Working Group of the International Union of Geological Sciences
will recommend the mid-twentieth century as the official beginning of the
Anthropocene. The biotic and geological impacts they are considering as
evidence have their roots in the turn of the twentieth century. 

[^ln-resistance-futile]: The failure of individual resistance to such
"animalistic" and societal forces is well documented in the case of individual
characters, as in Norris's *McTeague* and London's *Burning Daylight*. For
instances in which collective resistance comes up against wider deterministic
forces, see, the failed uprisings of Norris's *The Octopus*, the ineffectual
strike in Dreiser's *Sister Carrie*, and the complicated results of the
socialist revolution in London's *The Iron Heel*. 

[^ln-species-being]: "Species-being" was developed in Ludwig Feuerbach's
*Essence of Christianity* and extended considerably in Marx's theory of
alienation as he developed it in *The Philosophical and Economic Manuscripts of
1844*. In Marx's use, its general definition is activity that defines the
character of a species; for humans in particular, species-being is conscious
and spontaneous---i.e., non-alienated---production within a social context, or
production by and for a social group. In his furthest extension of the concept,
it even refers to the conscious development of human progress on the level of
the species. This concept is clearly useful in discussing London's engagement
with nature and Apocalypse, but it is also historically appropriate due to
London's well known interest in Marx and socialism. 

[^ln-stewart-london]: A Professor of English at UC Berkeley who was at least
familiar with London's work, it seems likely that Stewart would have been
familiar with *The Scarlet Plague*, and similarities between the two works are
many.

[^ln-world-ecology]: This term condenses a long-running discussion at the
intersection of economics, geography, history, and ecology. Jason W. Moore
defines it as "the process through which civilizations, themselves forces of
nature, are caught up in the co-production of life"; capitalism is one such
world-ecology, "joining the accumulation of capital, the pursuit of power, and
the co-production of nature in dialectical unity" [@moore_capitalism_2015 3].
