---
---

<!--

Working outline: 

1. Intro 
    
    A. ???

2. Ward

-->

[Brief, punchy opening that contains the argument, in the form of "many think
x about Herland, but Y"]

Given that it is such an intensely ecological work, Charlotte Perkins Gilman's
best-known utopian novel *Herland* has been kept surprisingly isolated from its
context in fields of ecology and conservation. It is not for lack of interest
in the general context of her work: from her participation in domestic reform
movements to her troubling interest in eugenics, much of the extant work on
Gilman has indeed been highly contextual. 

Rather, I propose that Gilman's place in the history of ecology and
environmentalism is visible now in a way that it has not been before. The
reason is the introduction of the Anthropocene as a concept and its
theorization in disciplines beyond the natural sciences. In addition to
changing the way we read Gilman's own work, having this concept to think with
opens up new avenues of inquiry into some of the influences that are already
well known in Gilman scholarship. More specifically, I will discuss a lesser
known strain of ecological thinking in Lester Ward's influence on
*Herland*---an influence that has largely been understood in terms of either
sociology, evolutionary theory, or eugenics. In doing so, I hope to put the
work of both Ward and Gilman in an intellectual context that is of particular
interest now, in an age of worsening anthropogenic climate change. But I also
hope to use this history to sketch a connection between *Herland* and the
broader critical conversation of ecocriticism in the Anthropocene. Her work is
not only relevant to this conversation; in many respects, it actually
anticipates it.

In addition to its meditations on gender, evolution, and economics, *Herland*
is obsessively concerned with the physical environment. Indeed, it is almost
impossible to fully separate these areas of interest, as the construction of an
environment subsumes the novel's narration of and argumentation about these
other topics. It is a land "in a perfect state of cultivation, where even the
forests looked as if they were cared for; a land that looked like an enormous
park, only that it was even more evidently an enormous garden" [@gilman 42].
The methods of this cultivation and care claim the focus of much of the novel,
from the selection and propagation of certain species to the construction of an
increasingly productive soil. But what is immediately evident is that
a collective humanity is at the center of everything we would normally think of
as "nature"---not in the blundering and self-defeating way that characterizes
most of environmental history, but in a manner that is deliberate and results
in a more productive total system. 

One example sums up particularly well the form this interaction takes---and
also gives us a hint of why a traditional ecocritical reading of the novel so
quickly becomes problematic:

> “It was a butterfly that made me a forester,” said Ellador. “I was about
eleven years old, and I found a big purple and green butterfly on a low flower.
I caught it, very carefully, by the closed wings, as I had been told to do, and
carried it to the nearest insect teacher---” (I [Vandyck] made a note there to
ask her what on earth an insect teacher was) “to ask her its name. She took it
from me with a little cry of delight. ‘Oh, you blessed child…. This is a female
of the obernut moth,’ she told me, ‘they are almost gone. We have been trying
to exterminate them for centuries. If you had not caught this one, it might
have laid eggs enough to raise worms enough to destroy thousands of our nut
trees---thousands of bushels of nuts,---and make years and years of trouble for
us.’

Gilman's ecological thinking in this moment is far from "deep ecology,"
a conservationist movement premised on the fundamental value of all living
things. Indeed, it hardly seems to value "nature" at all in any of the modes we
are used to seeing---as the sublime, the untamed wild, or in the more
contemporary mode, as a fragile "other." 

That Gilman turns away from these commonplaces does not mean she is unaware of
them, of course. Indeed, she sets up the expectation of a sentimental
appreciation of the natural world, narrating what appears to be a tender
embrace of an aestheticized butterfly. But it is an expectation that she
emphatically reverses. First, the creature becomes an object of study,
something to be brought to an "insect teacher" for further instruction. By the
end of the passage, we realize that Ellador's careful pursuit of the obernut
moth will ultimately culminate in the its death---as well as what may be the
last stage in the deliberate extinction of an entire species.

To appreciate nature in Herland, then, means to understand it and to transform
the “natural” into a system that maximizes benefit to humans---and also the
fictional obernut tree, but only incidentally. Understanding web of
interrelations among the organisms in question, they have created a situation
in which nurturing their environment will mean nurturing themselves (123). 

The same is true for the entire environment of Herland: there is no "wild"
nature to contend with, but only heavily mediated semi-natural systems that
have been in some way been touched by Herland's human inhabitants. The
decisions and actions taken by Herlanders as a collective have a clear
deterministic influence on the development of every other species. 

Furthermore, though this influence is isolated to the small, sequestered region
that defines Herland geographically, to the Herlanders it is the entire world.
The land itself thus becomes a narrative device for making the interlocking
relationships of a planetary system comprehensible by shrinking
it---conceptually similar to the "Biosphere 2" experiment, and subject to the
same population and production pressures of the entire planet.

To frame the issue in this way makes clear *Herland*'s relevance to the
Anthropocene. But if Gilman anticipates the terms of this discourse, she hardly
shares its tone, which is often apocalyptic where Gilman is triumphal. Herein
lies one of the apparent contradictions at the heart of Gilman's ecological
sensibility. On one hand, she recognizes the insurmountable pressures of
a growing human species on the "full world" of Herland, a geographically
isolated land on a "high spur of rock". On the other hand, however, her
resolution of this pressure is not to lessen human impact, but to make it even
more total and deterministic; not to become less anthropocentric in our
conceptions of nature, but infinitely more. 

To understand the presence of this contradiction and the way that Gilman
resolves it, we must look to Lester Ward's influential *Dynamic Sociology*,
which Gilman took as a foundation and which confronts the same tension.

That Gilman's friendship with Lester Ward had a significant impact on her work
will not be a revelation to most Gilman scholars. Much of the critical debate
has concerned the extent and nature of this influence, but most commentators
unite in focusing primarily on their shared belief in an originary
"gynaecocentric" culture and a corresponding evolutionary method of female
sexual selection [@allen 59-61]. They also concur, if largely implicitly, that
examining this influence illuminates Gilman's fiction and non-fiction alike.
Cynthia J. Davis points out that such influence is especially significant given
Gilman's vision, articulated in *The Man-Made World, or Our Androcentric
Culture*, of a theoretically engaged fiction that would "teach not by preaching
but by truly re-presenting," often with the explicit goal of forwarding or
countering the works of other theorists [qtd. in @davis 73]. 

But these studies of Gilman and Ward, though deeply interested in their shared
sociological and evolutionary theories, overlook the extent to which Ward's
sociology arose out of a foundation of studies of the natural environment and
conservationism. Many of these critics mention an important fact in the
background of Ward's work as a mere biographical aside, without accounting for
it in their reading of Gilman: namely, that Ward spent the formative years in
which he wrote his first and most influential work, *Dynamic Sociology*, as the
chief paleobotanist for the U.S. Geological Survey. 

These years would give Ward the time and space to begin his career as
a sociologist, but they would also steep him in the nascent field of ecology (?
am I using ecology as a catchall here?) and the American conservation movement.
He worked under the guidance of John Wesley Powell, the founder of the USGS and
an early voice urging stewardship of the land to replace the purely extractive
relationship with it that had prevailed, until the conservation movement,
unchallenged. Powell's work was in turn built on the foundation of George
Perkins Marsh's revolutionary work, *Man and Nature: Or, Physical Geography as
Modified by Human Action*, which was extremely influential in the decades after
it was published and has come back into focus now as one of the earliest key
texts in the history of the Anthropocene as a theory---Marsh polemically
asserts that "human action must rank among *geological* influences," thereby
laying the groundwork for a geological epoch defined by an expansion of that
geological influence [@marsh 464]. John R. Ross, in a study of the origins of
the conservation movement, draws a direct line of influence from Marsh to
Powell to Ward, saying that Powell "read Marsh's work and remembered the
lessons" in his own work, and that Powell was the "seminal leader" for Ward's
labors both on the Geological Survey and, to a lesser extent, in his early
writing [@ross 52-3]. 

The context of Ward's early work, then, is defined by progenitors of the idea
that the human species is at the center of apparently "natural" systems---even
as early as the end of the nineteenth century, and even where human influence
was not directly visible. The impact of these figures is evident throughout
*Dynamic Sociology*, but especially where Ward discusses the wastefulness of
agriculture and industry. For example, he writes:

> The natural resources of the earth are squandered with a wanton disregard of
the future. The forests are cut down to supply temporary wants, consumed by
escaping campfires, or purposely cleared for tillage, until the habitable
portions of the earth are successively transformed into lifeless deserts. The
soil is rapidly exhausted by the first occupants, who know only the immediate
present. The wild animals useful to man are soon extinguished by the heartless
destruction of the fertile females and helpless young. [@ward 89]

As Ward tells it, human encounters with the natural environment despoliate it, and
what is left behind is an exhausted waste land. And yet, for Ward, the wasteful
methods of human activity are not *against* nature, but merely an expression of
nature's own natural tendencies. He argues that the "wasteful methods [that]
prevail in society" are merely the same "as in the animal and vegetable
kingdoms," for "nature acts on the assumption that her resources are
inexhaustible" [@ward 87-8]. Where Marsh and Powell tended to see conservation
as protecting nature from human rapacity, Ward sees wastefulness as a natural
extension of the very wildness that defines nature itself. 

Herein lies the same paradox we will see in Gilman's *Herland*. On one hand,
human actions tend to have a detrimental and determinative effect on the
natural systems in which they intervene. But on the other hand, natural systems
left to their own devices are often unremittingly destructive, and at least as
"wasteful" as humanity itself---as in the case of the "obernut moth" in the
passage from Herland with which I began, which would obliterate the population
of the most productive nut trees in Herland if left to its own devices.

As with the Herlanders, Ward's solution to the excesses of unchecked natural
system is to manage them. But in his system, managing nature means managing
humanity itself, for we are "an integral part of this great unconscious
creative whole called nature, only a minute fraction of which can by any
possible means be brought within the range of his experience" [@ward 11]. The
portrait of a wasteful humanity that Ward paints in the passage on the previous
slide is a portrait of a humanity that has not *yet* taken its conscious
self-improvement upon itself. For Ward, government is an outgrowth of the human
capacity for "egoistic altruism, protecting others for the benefit of the
self," and arises out of a "moral sense which protects others where natural
laws would destroy them" [@ward 14]. Rendered in terms of resource preservation
and the future benefit of human beings, environmental protection is just an
outgrowth of an "extra-natural" moral sense based on selfish selflessness. 

But at the same time as it presents an anthropocentric view of nature, this
ontology incorporates humanity more fully into the ambit of an essentially
natural evolutionary system. If humanity is at once a part of nature and
nature's manager, then as a species we become *nature's means of managing
itself*. Ward sees the human as unique in that our processes are
"teleologic[al]" rather than "genetic." But because we are still part of
nature, nature's activity *becomes* teleological through us, as we use
purposive action to guide the development of the entire system. Ward thus
imagines the human as both the apex of evolution and evolution's replacement,
as genetic development gives way to teleological development. It's as though
all of non-human nature were a body devoted to growing the head that would
guide its further actions, and that head is the human species. In Gilman's
extension of the principle, Ellador and the rest of the Herland foresters have
as much a right to determine the place of the obernut moth in the Herland
ecology as they do to control their own impact on it, because they are all part
of the same cycle to which the Herlanders supply a *telos*.

Ward's way out of humanity's detrimental and determinative influence is
therefore, paradoxically, to recognize humanity as part of the natural systems
of which we are also the guides. This theorization of the human-nature
relationship anticipates the Anthropocene to the extent that it conceives of
humanity as a defining force within the interlocking natural systems of the
earth. But while Ward accepts the extent to which this influence has
historically been destructive, he sees it not as destructive in itself, but as
a process in need of reform. 

If George Perkins Marsh has been taken as a progenitor of apocalyptic theories
of the Anthropocene, Ward and Gilman can be taken as early theorists of the
"good Anthropocene," a loose and heterogeneous set of perspectives that eschew
the apocalyptic rhetoric of other Anthropocene theories in favor of a triumphal
embrace of human-led development of natural systems. Contributions to the
theory of a good Anthropocene range from modest catalogues of projects
promoting adaptation, rewilding, and sustainable agriculture to more polemical
works like the controversial "Ecomodernist Manifesto" from 2015, whose many
signatories from across scientific and humanistic disciplines argue in favor of
"decoupling human development from environmental impacts" by "intensifying many
human activities" in smaller and less integrated spaces---or, in their more
characteristically triumphal tone, "putting humankind's extraordinary powers to
work." Gilman's vision of the good Anthropocene would seem to fall somewhere in
between the two, emphatically not "decoupling" the fortunes of humanity and
nature, but also conceiving of the solution to destructive human influence on
nature as more, but wiser, human intervention. 

It should be said that by drawing lines between Gilman and the "good
Anthropocene" that I do not mean to ascribe to or promote it as a program. If
anything, the association of Gilman and Ward with the good Anthropocene should
underscore the many emphatic critiques of the "Ecomodernist Manifesto" in
particular as too comfortable with anthropogenic mass extinctions and too
committed to a version of history in which humanity is the only actor---as
Bruno Latour puts it, the manifesto is "written entirely as if humans were
still alone on stage, the only being who out of its own free will is in charge
of apportioning space, land, money and value to the old Mother Nature" [@Latour
223]. Considering these critiques both strengthens the case relating Gilman and
Ward to the good Anthropocene, in that these same critiques apply to both, and
points to a new cause for caution in works that have already been heavily
problematized by contemporary commentators. 

And yet. [Ambient labor if time]


