## Gilman panel proposal

Building on Charlotte Perkins Gilman's well known connection to Lester Ward and
her use of the "garden" as a paradigm for anthropogenic environmental change,
this paper will seek to identify Charlotte Perkins Gilman as a literary
contributor to the intellectual history of the Anthropocene. As Cynthia J.
Davis has shown, Gilman's *Herland* can be seen as a utopian, fictional
extrapolation of Ward's theories on women and evolution (73). But it is also
likely that *Herland*'s clear ecological consciousness is influenced by his
study of ecology, which was in turn influenced by the work of George Perkins
Marsh---a naturalist regarded as an early theorist of the Anthropocene in all
but name (Lowenthal 56). Serving as the Chief Paleontologist of the U.S.
Geological Survey while he wrote his influential *Dynamic Sociology*, Ward was
mentored by a disciple of Marsh's work, with whom he regularly exchanged ideas
on topics in philosophy and ecology alike (Ross 51-2). Gilman, meanwhile, was
not just an avid reader of Ward's work, but a longtime friend and correspondent
with Ward himself (Davis 73-4). The chain of influence will require further
research to characterize fully, but it is clear that all parties (excluding
Marsh) were engaged in an active exchange of ideas and, at times, were
collaborators. 

After demonstrating Gilman's relevance to the foundations of Anthropocene
thinking, this paper will examine some of the ways in which *Herland* merges
human and natural system. Herland's utopian social structure is based on what
I will call "ambient labor" and in the communal resource management Herlanders
are taught from birth. Instead of jobs and agriculture, Herlanders have roles
in the larger system, which they are constantly altering through some form of
political consensus. The environment, rather than being coerced or exploited,
is shaped from the soil up in such a way that it merely *provides*
autonomously. Any "production" in this system is primarily the production of
"environment" itself, and through this system Gilman renders the economic
activity of Herland as part of a larger ecological exchange of energy and
matter. This idiosyncratic version of the human-nature relationship falls in
between the relationships envisioned by Marsh and Ward, respectively. Through
the male interlopers who serve as the novel's protagonists, Gilman acknowledges
an ecological present defined by Marsh's version of anthropogenic environmental
change, which he sees as always destructive. But in Herland itself, she
imagines the conditions necessary to enable Ward's vision of the human as the
apex of evolution and as an agent to replace natural selection---that is,
anthropogenic change as primarily benign and part of a larger social evolution.
Gilman's place in the context of ecological thought can be defined by the
tension between these two poles---a tension that is historically rooted while
still being germane to contemporary thinking on the Anthropocene.


