---
title: Gilman’s Garden&#58; *Herland*'s Centenary and the Environmental Humanities 
author: Phillip R. Polefrone
fontsize: 12pt
geometry: margin=1in
bibliography: bibliography.bib
csl: csl/mla.csl
...

### Introduction

In her utopian novel *Herland* (1915), Charlotte Perkins Gilman creates “a land
in a state of perfect cultivation, where even the forests looked as if they
were cared for; a land that looked like an enormous park, only that it was even
more evidently an enormous garden”; a land with “clean, well-built
roads,…attractive architecture,…[and] ordered beauty”; a land more “petted”
than any before seen (“even in Germany”), in which practically all of the trees
are “[f]ood-bearing” (42-4). It is a world unto itself that blends the built
and natural environments to provide for its people a perfect freedom from
scarcity. The soil has been improved and the wildlife managed with such care
that no farming or harvesting is necessary---the land *provides*, without the
coercion of agricultural labor. Nobody seems to direct the maintenance of this
environment, and yet it is maintained by the effortless and seemingly automatic
contributions of Herland's people. Some keep careful watch for destructive
elements of the ecology, others construct careful art objects that embody a
culture of environmental care.[^ln-artobjects] Still others run communal eating
houses that completely fulfill Herland's need for meals just as reliably and
evenly as the environment provides the ingredients. This is a society that has
grown together with its environment in mutual sustenance, a garden in which the
human grows in tandem with other organisms, each producing naturally what the
other needs to survive. Herland's forests are not, in other words, the “rank”
and “tangled” vegetation that Gilman sees in the world beyond (67). The land
has evolved beyond competition and into a freedom attainable only through
cooperation.

*Herland* is often read primarily for its "gynaecocentric" (?) evolutionary
theory and its vision of a society populated only of women---and understandably
so; this is the explicit centerpiece of the novel. No less central, but much
less discussed, are the novel's insights into the role of the human activity in
shaping natural systems. The Herland environment is marked by benign but
absolute human control over the natural environment. While there is very little
agriculture or cultivation in the traditional sense, Herlanders have chosen to
retain and support certain elements of the ecosystem while systematically
reducing or removing others, resulting in a food-production system that is able
to persist without maintenance or replanting---more reminiscent of permaculture
than any of the prevailing horticultural models of the time. Herland is a
woman-made Eden, but it is also what Leo Marx calls a "middle landscape," a
place that is symbolically "created by mediation between art and nature,"
eschewing both back-to-the-land primitivism and technological futurism to
create a zone in which nature and culture are mutually supportive.
[@marx_machine_2000 71; see also @chang_economics_2010 342-3] And yet, this
mid-century ecocritical paradigm is not enough to account for *Herland*'s
social-ecological imagination, nor why this imagination should be of concern
now, a century after its publication. The turn in the ecocritical conversation
following the discovery of the Anthropocene allows us to place this marginal
work in a new context, and it also brings Gilman's ideas into clearer focus.

What makes Herland especially relevant to Anthropocene studies in particular is
the fact that this anthropocentric ecological management arises out of a
catastrophic geological event, population pressures, and the limits of a
suddenly full world. Herland is situated on a triangular, “high-standing spur”
rising out of the “dark green sea of crowding forest” around it, isolated and
inaccessible to the rest of the world (41). As one of the Herlanders explains,
it was once open and able to participate in economic and ecological exchange,
but war and an earthquake sealed it off completely two thousand years before
the narration begins [Herland x]. From that moment, it becomes a world in
miniature, an open-air pseudo-biosphere that will support its human population
with the resources available to it or not at all.

In its sudden transition to a closed system, Herland evokes the world that was
beginning to become visible from Gilman's vantage in 1915, when consciousness
of the globe as a trading paradigm was arising in tandem with consciousness of
the planet as an ultimate limit to resource exploitation and growth. Among
naturalists, Norris and Dreiser were especially attuned to the global
consciousness of trade, beginning to narrate the open movement of capital
internationally in *The Pit* and *The Financier*, respectively. The more
general consciousness of this state of affairs, in which capital flowed freely
across borders from about 1870 until it began to be regulated around the time
of the First World War, is evident in the French Chamber of Deputies decision
to outlaw any imports of capital [@streeter_globalization_2010 94-5]. <!--
details come from from histories of globalization... streeter et al.
Globalization and Autonomy; others; see if it would make sense to include
Wenzel Planet Vs. Globe here, need at least footnote for the distinction-->

Of the other consciousness, the *planet* as a final limit, Gilman's isolated
spur of rock is the chief literary representative in this period, drawing from
a reservoir of ecological thinking that would eventually give rise to an
institutionalized conservation movement. Among her most cherished
correspondents and friends was Lester Ward, who, though best known as the
founder of modern sociology, was also a geologist and paleobotanist, at one
time serving as the Chief Paleontologist of the U.S. Geological Survey
[@burnham_lester_1956 2, @ross_man_1975 51]. Ward is on one hand a contributor
to American conservationism, particularly in his work with Major John Wesley
Powell: Ward's mentor and the director of the U.S. Geological Survey, Powell
was an influential early voice of conservation, laying the groundwork for the
Reclamation Act of 1902 and training the scientists who would carry the call
for responsible resource use into the twentieth century [@ross_man_1975 51, 53,
57, 59; see also @stegner_beyond_1992]. But on the other hand, Ward articulates
a vision of the human's place in nature that seems contrary to the spirit of
limitation that has motivated the modern Anthropocene movement. In Ward's view,
the human is both the end-product of evolution and the agent that takes over
where evolution leaves off---both part of nature and the end of it. This
complicated dual role justifies the "laying open of her [nature's] bowels" for
experimentation, an explicitly Baconian perspective that understands the human
as the rightful "master" of non-human organisms and processes
[@ward_dynamic_1926 11-2]. The Wardian view of nature promotes absolute mastery
without exploitation---Prometheanism in the name of stewardship.[^prometheanism]

[^prometheanism]: explain prometheanism; use robinson article.

The same perspective can be attributed to Gilman. Ward had a great influence on
Gilman's thinking in the composition of *Herland*, as Cynthia J. Davis has
shown [@davis_his_2003]. But for Gilman, "influence" is more visible and
determinative than it might be for other authors. In *The Man-Made World, or
Our Androcentric Culture*, Gilman articulates a vision of engaged fiction that
would forward the ideas of other works, "teach[ing] not by preaching but by
truly re-presenting" [qtd. in @davis_his_2003 73]. This is an effective summary
of her approach in *Herland*. While the sociological and evolutionary elements
of this influence have been discussed by Davis and others, Ward's ecological
thinking had no less of a role in forming Gilman's novel. She does not
reproduce Ward's thinking exactly, however. Rather, her fictional extrapolation
of his theories in *Herland* dramatizes a tension between absolute limits of and
absolute control over the planet and its processes. 

This tension between limitation and control has hardly been resolved in the
century since *Herland* first appeared in Gilman's self-published monthly
journal, *The Forerunner*. To read *Herland* ecocritically now, in the dawn not
of the Anthropocene but of our consciousness of it, is to recognize this
enclosed garden civilization as a fictional laboratory for the scientific,
sociological, and ethical issues that define thinking about the Anthropocene.
More specifically, her and Ward's ambivalence regarding the status of the human
in nature---to put it somewhat reductively, either as destroyer or
savior---prefigures a contemporary controversy over the possibility of a "good
Anthropocene." Both center on the same question: should our absolute control
over non-human nature be understood as a justified evolutionary step, or does
the very premise of absolute control violate the material and ethical
limitations of the planet? [need to contextualize why I'm about to go on this
little journey in terms of Gilman?]

The former perspective is at the heart of any robust defense of the "good
Anthropocene." At its most basic, the "good Anthropocene" movement is what it
sounds like. It suggests that there is some version of the Anthropocene that
would result not in catastrophe for humans and non-human nature, and that
embracing human guidance of the planetary ecology could ultimately be
beneficial for all involved. There are many visions of what a "good"
Anthropocene would mean, but they come together in rejecting the catastrophic
or "dystopian" visions of our environmental future, seeking instead ways to use
technological and social innovations to reduce further damage and even repair
the damage that has been done---to turn the Anthropocene into "a more just,
prosperous, and ecologically diverse" epoch. The most radical and controversial
articulation of the "good Anthropocene," and probably the most widely
circulated, has been "An Ecomodernist Manifesto" (2015). The signatories of the
manifesto argue that the route to "decoupling human development from
environmental impacts" is (counterintuitively and, many would say,
counterfactually) "intensifying many human activities---particularly farming,
energy extraction, forestry, and settlement." Concentrating these activities in
smaller areas, they reason, will allow us to leave more land completely wild;
but their emphasis is always on the Promethean faith in humanity's ability to
tinker its way out of any limitations, or in their words, "putting humankind's
extraordinary powers" to work. In short, they celebrate human technological
triumphs over nature, rehearsing a familiar narrative of a liberatory
technology that frees humanity from the drudgery of agricultural
labor.[^ln-ecomodern-responses] 

[^ln-ecomodern-responses]: The responses to this manifesto will be discussed in
more detail later, but have tended to bring existing critiques of modernism to
bear on this new instantiation of it. The apparent ease with which the
Anthropocene is able to become a "good" thing elides differential risk and
responsibility as well as a long history of disenfranchisement from land and
resources. Ecomodernism, in other words, is just a way to prop up a facile
progressivism in green clothing. See Latour, Crist, and Collard et al.

The Ecomoderns should not be taken as the sole representatives of the "good
Anthropocene," however, by either the concept's supporters or its
critics. Other approaches to the concept are less comfortable with this
triumphalism, focusing more on the need to resist catastrophism and to promote
forms of resilience and transition instead. In the words of Bennett et al.
(2016), "The future does not have to be bleak. ...Whether or not one agrees
with these [dystopian] characterizations, extrapolations of current,
maladaptive trends into a bleak future run the risk of becoming
self-fulfilling, because people base their actions on what they believe about
society and their future" (441). They continue to offer a range of solutions
that acknowledge the need for social and economic transition to a greater
degree than the authors of "An Ecomodernist Manifesto," creating a database of
"seeds" (initiatives) in a taxonomy of approaches and areas of intended impact.
While unlikely to evade social and environmentalist critique, this version of
the "good Anthropocene" at least includes new forms of "equitable opportunities
for decision making" in its range of goals, as well as initiatives that explore
ways to repurpose traditional sustainable agriculture techniques (443-5). It
is, in other words, a "good Anthropocene" that leans on plurality rather than
a universalist progressive narrative.

And yet, even the pluralist "good Anthropocene" leaves unanswered the most
fundamental questions of ethical and material limitations to a "progress"
premised on human domination of nature. Ethically, the good Anthropocene is
defined by the old (but undismissable) problem of anthropocentrism. As Bruno
Latour points out in his response, the Manifesto "is written entirely as if
humans were still alone on stage, the only being who out of its own free will
is in charge of apportioning space, land, money and value to the old Mother
Nature....[T]he ecomodernists are also *uchronists*, as if they were living at
a time when they alone were in command" (223). On the contrary, the
Anthropocene "modifies the scale, the speed, the rhythm and, more importantly,
the distribution of active agents in any political conversation we have about
the entanglement of humans and non-humans" (222-3). In this version of the
Anthropocene, more redolent of the Anthropocene conversation in general, the
centrality of humans to the epoch does not bespeak absolute control. Rather, at
center stage is the rapidity with which human action, whether intentional or
a product simply of scale, can influence non-human organisms and communities in
ways we could never predict, let alone hope to marshal. The recognition of this
kind of entanglement has compelled Donna Haraway to set aside the Anthropocene
moniker entirely in favor of what she calls the "Chthulucene," a "name for the
dynamic ongoing sym-chthonic forces and powers of which people are a part" and
which demands "intense commitment and collaborative work and play with other
[non-human] terrans" (160). The problem with even imagining the level of
control Ecomoderns assume out of hand is that it hubristically simplifies these
entanglements, reducing a vast multitude of actors to a single, determining
one. 

The ethical problem with ignoring entanglement quickly becomes a matter of
cold, wet fact, however, as recognizing this multitude of actors determines how
one sees the material limitations to economic growth. Among the Manifesto's
most peculiar claims is that "there is still remarkably little evidence that
human population and economic expansion will outstrip the capacity to grow food
or procure critical material resources in the foreseeable future." This notion
can only be maintained within the limited frame of the economist's graph. As
Eileen Crist points out, the Manifesto only admits for evidence certain
"insuperable obstacle[s]" to growth, "such as a hard agronomic boundary in food
production or the depletion of some indispensable and non-substitutable
resource" (251). These variables leave out the very real disappearance of
biodiversity in an unheard of scale, mass extinctions on a scale that would
usually be understood as an epoch-defining catastrophe. As Crist reminds us,
"mass extinction does not have a technical solution" (250-1, 247). And yet even
the economist's variables should not be so easily passed over. Absolute
agronomic limits may not have been encountered yet, but rapid ecological
collapses in response to climate change could bring those limits rapidly into
play. 

Gilman, in her extrapolations on Ward's theories and in her own right, should
be seen as part of the deep philosophical history of the "good Anthropocene,"
both in its vision of human control as an evolutionary imperative and in the
ethical problems it embodies. In some ways, however, her foundation surpasses
both Ward and the contemporary "good Anthropocene" arguments a century later.
Gilman's version of a good Anthropocene is premised on a web of mutual
determination among physical environment, the economic base, and social
structure, arguing for a more nuanced understanding of "progress" that relies
on refinement rather than growth. [ Details, write this up after I've written
the chapter ]. Despite this apparent foresight, however, it also foreshadows
the hubris and ethical problems that mar the very notion of a "good"
Anthropocene a century later. [ More details, on population control, consensus,
and anthropocentric ethics ] These contradictions cut to the heart of the
naturalist philosophy in the way they deal with environmental determinism.
Granting the fundamental premise of determinism, she complicates it by placing
the human at both ends of the equation, as both a guide for the "forces" that
determine ecological development and one of many elements of the system those
forces determine. This principle of codetermination constitutes a form of
Utopian Naturalism that both characterizes the contemporary good Anthropocene
debate and exposes its philosophical limits.


### Old

<!-- old intro 
In what follows, I will argue that Charlotte Perkins Gilman uses the garden as
a framing device to depict a system in which management of environment replaces
the market cycle of production and consumption, collective sustenance becomes
the end-goal of the economy, and the human coevolves (both culturally and
literally) with its environment. After exposing how Gilman uses world
construction as a mode of ecotopian argumentation, I will show that the
ecological entanglement of built and natural environments creates a garden
economy in which labor, subsumed into being, ceases to be an exploitative
activity, and vitality becomes the mechanism and end-goal of the economy. In
the second section, I will argue that this relationship to the environment
leads to a coevolutionary system in which biological determinism, environmental
determinism, and education all contribute to a growing-together of humanity
with nature. This process, as I will show, can be most effectively understood
in its similarity to the Marxian “metabolism” of town and
country.[^ln-marxism-gilman] I will conclude by returning to my initial
question---What does *Herland* offer to the environmental humanities now as a
text of transition to a post-fossil fuel economy and ecology?---and pointing to
some of the environmental valences of Gilman's particular utopian brand of
literary naturalism.

[^ln-marxism-gilman]: With this part of the argument, I hope to question the
general silence between Marxist criticism and Gilman scholarship. Walter Benn
Michaels’s reading of “The Yellow Wallpaper” in *The Gold Standard and the
Logic of Literary Naturalism* is an immediate and notable exception to this
silence. -->

### Lester Ward on the Human's Place in Ecology

<!-- The goal here will be to place Ward's ideas into the broader history of
thinking about humans and nature: the way he builds on the Baconian tradition
and 18th-century visions of the wilderness as savage and cultivation as
"improvement" (can follow up on Wulf for sources here); but more important to
place the newness of Ward's theories on display, specifically his evolutionary
imperative for control and the fact that sociology is a natural offshoot of
ecology in his view. By thinking of things like economies, religions, and
cultures as subfields of ecology (is that too strong?), Ward opens up the
possibility for a web of interconnection among these apparently distinct
realms. A move prepared for by "Nature's Economy." See Worster for additional
commentary on Ward in ecological context. 5-10 pp?-->

The deep roots of the "Good Anthropocene" controversy can be found in the work
of Lester F. Ward and the moment of ecological thinking he represents---a
moment defined by the contrasting poles of limitation, established by the
revolutionary work of George Perkins Marsh, and human mastery of nature, more
in step with the overwhelming Victorian trend toward
"civilization."[^ln-victorian-ecology] Indeed, comparing the "bad" and "good"
Anthropocenes with this moment of conflict over the human makes one feel that
we have been having the same argument for a century and a half. [section
thesis; make sure to point out that I'm talking mostly about DS because that's
what Gilman read]

[^ln-victorian-ecology]: On Marsh's general influence, see Marsh's *Man and
Nature: Or, Physical Geography as Modified by Human Action* and David
Lowenthal's introduction to the Belknap Press edition. Lowenthal argues
elsewhere that Marsh should be seen as an early marker of Anthropocene
awareness: @lowenthal_origins_2016, largely because of his anticipation of the
human as a geological force and his emphasis on the destructive outcomes of
human scale and interference. .


<!-- Marsh paragraph --> Marsh's *Man and Nature* (1864), "the most influential
text of its time next to Darwin's *On the Origin of Species*," made him "the
first to realize that man's environmental impacts were not only enormous and
horrific, but perhaps irreversibly cataclysmic" [@lowenthal_origins_2016 56].
Building on the first inklings of climate science[^ln-humboldt-climate-science]
in Alexander von Humboldt's *Personal Narrative of Travels to the Equinoctal
Regions of America* (18--), Marsh demonstrates that human influence across
"woods," "waters," and "sands" has been universally malignant, notwithstanding
the modest success of reforestation efforts [@marsh_man_1965 13, 175-7; 43-4].
His relevance to thinking about limitation and conservation in the Anthropocene
has been bolstered by his conclusion that "human action must rank among
geological influences," a simple statement that anticipates the defining tenet
of the Anthropocene [@marsh_man_1965 464]. 

[^ln-humboldt-climate-science]: The argument for Humboldt as an early climate
science belongs to Andrea Wulf's *The Invention of Nature* (2016). 

<!--Marsh, Powell, Ward-->Ward was very probably familiar with Marsh's work
directly, but was at least familiar with the body of ideas his work represented
through Major John Wesley Powell. Powell was at the head of the U.S. Geological
Survey at a time when its aims were defined by the nascent conservation
movement Marsh's work had, in large part, sparked [@worster_river_2000 484]. In
all likelihood, Powell read *Man and Nature*---the work's influence alone is
enough to make a confident inference; John R. Ross, though citing no evidence
himself, claims that "Powell read Marsh's work and remembered the lessons" in
his early surveys [@ross_man_1975 52-3]. Regardless, the movement Marsh's work
spawned defined the parameters within which Powell's own work in the Geological
Survey proceeded, not least when Ward joined the agency in 1881. Ward's own
work for the survey was defined by these conservation-minded goals, but there
was a more general exchange of ideas between Powell and Ward that would define
Ward's early work: *Dynamic Sociology* is dedicated to Major Powell, and Powell
gave Ward his position in part to support him while he completed his book
[@ross_man_1975 51-2]; Donald Worster describes Ward as almost "a brother with
whom [Powell] sometimes argued intensely" (442). Ward also cites Powell's
thoughts on ethnology and religion in *Dynamic Sociology* [@ward_dynamic_1926
II:254-8]. To place Ward, Powell, and Marsh in too close an intellectual
proximity would be a mistake, but Marsh's brand of conservation and his
awareness of the deleterious influence of human activity on nature defined the
intellectual environment with which Ward's theories would either have to
integrate or contend.

<!-- Ward adhering to and breaking from ecology/conservation-->To a significant
degree, Ward should be understood as breaking from this early wave of
conservation, insofar as he sees (contrary to Marsh) human control of nature as
not only largely benign, but right and proper. Donald Worster places Ward in
the company of those in "the late Victorian age, from the 1860s to the end of
the century" for whom "there appeared an unusually fierce determination to make
the civilizing process stick good and tight, once and for all," to the point of
employing the "aggressive, resolute, even violent force of Culture to harness
and subdue the nature" that was "menacing," immoral, and simply uncouth
[@worster_nature's_1985 170-5] Just as it would be a mistake to align Ward with
his conservationist mentors, though, writing off their influence entirely (as
often happens in discussions of Ward) would elide an important element of
ecological consciousness in Ward's work. Worster frames this ecological
consciousness as "an ecological counterpart" to Ward's "social ideals," but in
fact it would be more accurate to say that his sociology arises out of
a rigorous training in the natural sciences.[^ln-worster-apologia] Indeed,
according to Ward, the social sciences should consciously follow on the
discoveries and methods of the natural sciences. Discussing economics, for
example, he laments erroneous assumptions that could have been avoided "had
sociology been thoroughly grounded in biology, as Comte so justly insisted that
it should be" [@ward_dynamic_1926 87]. This aside confirms---and confirms as
deliberate---what is already clear in *Dynamic Sociology*: that Ward's
sociology is built on a foundation of knowledge we now recognize as the
beginnings of ecology. 

[^ln-worster-apologia]: This relationship is much clearer in Worster's later
work on Major Powell, which is more concerned with *Dynamic Sociology* than
with Ward's later works [@worster_river_2000 440-8]. It is no coincidence that
a discussion of Ward's earlier works would note the ecological influence on his
sociology, as *Dynamic Sociology* was written during a period of Powell's
intellectual and financial support.

Nevertheless, these ecological beginnings were not enough to keep Ward from
a Baconian vision of science as a tool for mastering nature and exceeding
limits---Ward cites Bacon approvingly to say that "Nature can only be conquered
by obeying her" (13). In a moment of seeming humility for the species, Ward
calls the human "an integral part of this great unconscious creative whole
called nature, only a minute fraction of which can by any possible means be
brought within the range of his experience" (11). But to Ward, the intelligence
and teleological capacity of humanity at once makes us the apex of all natural
systems and gives us the right to take over for natural processes. It is as if
nature developed humanity as its head, and naturally we have since taken
control of the organisms and processes that produced us. This conclusion
derives from the theory that evolution has a "tendency to organization," and
that "consciousness and intelligence are products of [this] organization";
additionally, "teleological action has...kept pace with the degree of
intelligence" (10). While "nature's processes are not teleologic but genetic,"
humans differ in that their "conscious action is...teleological" (9). But
nature's activity *becomes* teleological in that the human, still understood as
part of nature, uses purpose and science to guide natural development. The
human thus becomes part of the evolutionary process---or rather, in Ward's
eyes, *could* and *should* be, but only when humans assume the mantle.
A Darwinian to a point, Ward understands that "Mind is found only at the end of
the series, and not at the beginning. It is the distinctive attribute of the
creature, and not of the creator. It resides in man, and not in nature"
(10-11). He breaks from Darwinian evolution in positing the possibility of
understanding human activity as part of the evolutionary process---including
artificial selection as well as natural selection as an evolutionary mechanism. 

<!--Ward on carrying capacity... use this to play out the conflict-->Blending
human and nature in this way makes the idea of "natural limits" to growth
difficult to maintain. Just like the proponents of a good Anthropocene, Ward
acknowledges limits only on the way to exulting in humanity's ability to
surpass them---despite, or perhaps because, his theories are grounded in an
ecology that takes the human as part of its purview. A particularly telling
example arises in his discussion of carrying capacity, or the number of a given
species an environment is able to support (taking into consideration factors
such as climate, resource availability, space, and other species). Ward does
not use the term carrying capacity, even though it was beginning to be used in
some agricultural and botanical contexts---it would not enter more general use
until either Aldo Leopold employed it in 1933 or, more probably, in post-war
ecology [@robbins_carrying_2006]. But, whether he came to it independently or
whether the concept was more mobile than the term,  Ward is certainly talking
about carrying capacity in all but name: 

> [I]n the uncontrolled operation of natural laws, beings capable of feeling
are liable to injury. In an ever-changing environment, that degree of
correspondence can never be reached in which no friction can occur. It is this
perpetual conflict of every species with its adverse surroundings, this
grinding at the outer boundaries of its sphere of activity, which constantly
keeps its numbers down to moderate limits and its members restricted to
definite geographical areas. (14)

Thus it is for other species, anyway. For the human, a superior degree of
adaptation, driven directly by a superior intelligence, increases the ratio of
those who "make it" many times over---the limits of nature are always
surpassed, but without (apparently) backlash of famine or despoliation:

> In man this ratio [of non-survival] is less than in any other animal, and it
is this which has enabled him, to so much greater an extent than any other
animal, to increase his numbers and expand his territorial limits. This has
been due to his superior sagacity and cunning, to his intelligence....
[Humanity's gains] must be attributed to an increased acquaintance with its
relations to the world around it. (14)

The Baconian imperative to "interpret" nature without "serving" it is expressed
here as a surpassing of limits, but surpassing limits is paradoxically entwined
with being aware of them. Ward's technological triumphalism is expressed here
as growth through careful study, presumably a study that would include the
negative effects of that growth if and when they are encountered. Indeed,
Ward's desire for humanity to surpass all limits is not without qualification:
he acknowledges that "the rapid multiplication of individuals could not long
continue and would not be economically desirable," rendering the "large amount
of friction that currently exists" between humanity and its environments as
a check against ruination (15-6). But despite these Malthusian misgivings, Ward
still frames limitation in general as a source of "a vast amount of physical
and mental suffering" that our intelligence should liberate us from. 

<!-- government as a surprising stage in evolution, as guiding force and
product-->Not all human ingenuity is technological in Ward's mind, however, nor
is physical technology even the most important development. The greatest
achievement of an evolutionary system based on increasing organization is even
more organization, in the form of communities and government. Ward sees
government as a development of an evolutionary imperative toward "[a]ltruistic
morality," which "arises as soon as intelligence begins to counteract the
natural influences which restrict population" and lead to suffering (14).
It is an "egoistic altruism, protecting others for the benefit of self," but
the benefits of this altruism are still essentially communal (14). Propagation
beyond limits relies on this communal instinct:

> One of the secrets of the success of the human race in peopling the entire
globe has been this moral sense which protects others where natural laws would
destroy them. Government, which has this extra-natural protection for its
object, had its rise in this altruistic sentiment.... (14)

Intelligence, though it is a product of evolution's tendency toward greater
organization, works against the main driver of Darwinian evolution, natural
selection and the "friction" between an organism and its environment. The means
by which these environmental influences are managed is government protection.
 
<!--set up contrast with spencer-->Ward's emphasis on the altruistic
and communal side of evolution sets him apart from other evolutionary
commentators and theorists of the period, most notably Herbert Spencer,
a widely read social Darwinist who influenced many American literary
naturalists (particularly Dreiser). The fundamental points on which Ward and
Spencer differ are the applicability of biological evolutionary theory and
competition---the messy randomness and the "survival of the fittest"---to the
affairs of humanity. Ward complained that Spencer's relentless focus on biology
failed to take into account the peculiarities of human mind, insofar as he
"failed to make [psychology] the basis of either his sociology or his ethics"
[@ward_psychological_1893 464]. As a result, Spencer's work set forth the
"underlying principles" for the "Physiocrats" whose "writings...constitute the
warp of modern individualism"---a group in which he includes Adam Smith,
Malthus, and Ricardo [@ward_psychological_1893 464]. The "Physiocratic" view is
one that assumes human enterprises follow the same rules as biological
evolution, while also assuming that biological evolution results in the most
efficient outcomes. 

<!--ward against competition, efficiency of nature-->Ward disputes both
assumptions. Competition, from the Physiocratic perspective, ultimately leads
to stability and optimization. Placing this view in ecological context, Worster
relates Spencer's view of evolution to Frederic Clements's theory of the
"climax community"---or a stable community of organisms that results from
innumerable generations of struggle for survival: "It was the paradoxical
belief of both of these men [Spencer and Clements] that the war of each against
all for the essentials of life results in a more harmonious social or
ecological organism" [@worster_nature's_1985 214]. Ward rejected this
competitive individualism. Cynthia J. Davis relates Ward's belief that "natural
competition...checked rather than enhanced evolution" to his belief in reform:
"As did many progressives...he resisted biological determinism and embraced
Lamarckianism, as the belief in the biological transmission of *acquired*
traits helped explain variation and emphasized human agency" [@davis_his_2003
75]. Emphasizing human agency is necessary in Ward's system because, in his
view, human intervention is the route to efficiency---precisely because
competition can be replaced by cooperation. In nature, "Even the vegetation is
at war, and the result of that strife is immensely to lower the possible
standard of every living species of plant" [@ward_dynamic_1926 87-8].
Artificially guided development is a way to take humans out of that war---with
each other and with the rest of nature.

<!-- development of human structures from within-->A peaceful coexistence
is not imagined as an automatic effect of human intelligence, however. The
Hobbesian "war of all against all" is still posited as a paradigm for
understanding human interactions with each other and with the environment, as
is the case in Spencer; in contrast to Spencer, however, Ward takes it as an
insufferable status quo that humanity must develop its way out of through
communal purposive action. In fact, herein lies "the very great hope of social
science":

> [The sociologist] learns that within that great group of phenomena subject to
human control, and under the subordinate head of direct teleological phenomena,
stand the phenomena which result from the operation of the *social forces*, and
in this fact resides the entire possibility of an artificial social progress.
[@ward_dynamic_1926 II:104]

Organization and altruism present a way out of the grim, Spencerian vision of
a social Darwinist universe that has defined many readings of literary
naturalism. Ward urges purposive and altruistic transformation of nature and
society alike through conscious guidance, rather than the assertion of
individual imperatives (so-called "rational" action[^ln-hardin]) until that
individual is halted by hard natural limits. But in order for this progress to
occur, human societies have to learn to transform themselves just like they
transform communities of other species. "That the same laws have operated in
the super-organic as in the organic world is quite obvious," he writes. "Not
only the progress out of barbarism into civilization, but the march of
civilization itself, has been attended with the same incidents that
characterize the development of a species or of an individual" (88). He goes on
to relate human wars and economic struggles with the Hobbesian war of nature,
but only as a way of calling for a development into a more harmonious
situation. The human is both the subject and object of this teleological
evolutionary paradigm, and government is the mechanism of change.

[^ln-hardin]: "Rational" in a purely economistic sense, deriving from Adam
Smith, in which rationality means pursuing individual gain in all cases.
A well-known application of that form of "rational" action can be found in
Garret Hardin's famous essay, "The Tragedy of the Commons," in which the
rational herdsman is shown to deplete the common fields, to the ruination of
all, rather than cooperate with his neighbors [@hardin_tragedy_1964]. Elinor
Ostrom's Nobel-winning work on the managed commons refutes this view of
rationality in terms Ward would likely have appreciated
[@elinor_governing_1990]. Hardin would later revise his work to acknowledge the
possibility of a managed commons. See also [@nixon_neoliberalism_2009].

<!--Ward's system as it relates to environmental destruction--> That Gilman
drew liberally from this body of ideas is well known, as is the extent to which
she developed them in order to incorporate them in her own body of
work.[^ln-ward-gilman-scholarship] One passage of *Dynamic Sociology* in
particular appears to have stood out to Gilman's ecological sensibilities: when
Ward discusses areas of "natural" wastefulness in modern human societies, he
includes what we would now think of as a lack of sustainable development. In
the first place, Ward does not consider nature itself an efficient or
sustainable system: "Nature acts on the assumption that her resources are
inexhaustible" [@ward_dynamic_1926 87]. This also appears to include the human
as part of nature, however, as he continues that the "same wasteful methods
prevail in society as in the animal and vegetable kingdoms" [@ward_dynamic_1926
88]. Natural limits to growth reemerge here, not as a feature of the land or
the planetary ecology itself, but as a factor of human ignorance and
wastefulness---the part of the human that is still closest to "nature":

> The natural resources of the earth are squandered with a wanton disregard of
the future. The forests are cut down to supply temporary wants, consumed by
escaping campfires, or purposely cleared for tillage, until the habitable
portions of the earth are successively transformed into lifeless deserts. The
soil is rapidly exhausted by the first occupants, who know only the immediate
present. The wild animals useful to man are soon extinguished by the heartless
destruction of the fertile females and helpless young. [@ward_dynamic_1926 89]

A Marsh-like awareness of systemic environmental destruction emerges at the end
of the most ecologically relevant portion of Ward's first work, an unexpected
elegy for needlessly wasted life and squandered fruitfulness. Perhaps
surprisingly (to a contemporary reader, at least), Ward's solution is again not
to become more like nature, but to root out what "nature" remains in us. Even
more curiously, Ward's lament for environmental destruction slips into
a critique of economic inequality:

> Labor and capital, whose dependence upon each other is absolute, are
constantly found in open hostility, which greatly reduces productiveness of
both. Exchange of products is largely carried on by redundant third parties,
who, through no fault of their own, are allowed to absorb the largest share of
the wealth produced.... Wealth is not only unequally but inequitably
distributed. In short, all the functions of society are performed in a sort of
chance way, which is precisely the reverse of economical, but wholly analogous
to the natural processes of the lower organic world. [@ward_dynamic_89]

Labor and capital are just one more battle in the war of all against all. Ward
does not quite go as far as naming capitalism as the cause of the environmental
destruction he decries above, but he puts the failures of unsustainable
development and the failures of labor relations down to the same essential lack
of "telic" refinement. Gilman would make the connection more explicit.

[^ln-ward-gilman-scholarship]: See especially [@davis_his_2003] and
[@allen_overthrow_2004]. [Should probably include more; see Allen for more
sources on this]

<!-- Necessary to return to good Anthropocene to drive home the relevance of
this context?-->

### The Garden, the Full World, and Ambient Labor

<!-- need to define/introduce full world concept (sources???)-->

Gilman develops Ward's concepts of [ concepts ] primarily through the vehicle
of the garden. For much of her life, Gilman kept a garden of her own---a
“vegetable garden mind you!, not merely flowers”---at one point as a means of
subsistence in the lean years of her later life, at another as what she
referred to as a “sanitarium” (*Selected Letters* 180, 281, 284). The relevance
of subsistence gardens to *Herland* is clear: in all its appearances in the
novel, the garden is a space that is simultaneously built and natural, a source
of food and material goods that is neither agricultural nor industrial and yet
is not entirely distinct from either. As an imagined society, Herland also
echoes the principles of containment and control inherent to her view of
gardening: it exists in a small and clearly demarcated space, and it is only
able to exist there by careful control over its elements and how they interact.
The society's chief concern is in maintaining this existence by managing what
we would now call its "ecological footprint"---or the amount of land required
to sustain the lifestyle of its population.[^ln-ecological-footprint] Unlike
the Ecomoderns, however, Gilman does not imagine a technological fix to the
conditions of scarcity that define Herland, or not exactly. She instead uses
the garden as a paradigm for the controlled interaction of Herland's economy,
ecology, and social structures, communally managed by Herlanders to achieve the
best possible lifestyle given their finite landmass and resources. In other
words, the "garden" paradigm combines the environmentalist's concern with
limits and the "good Anthropocene" commitment to make human control over the
environment as benign as possible for all organisms involved. 

[^ln-ecological-footprint]: Give examples here... Earth currently needs
something like 2.5 Earths, America needs so much, China needs so much, while
"undeveloped" countries use much less.

The tension between limitation and control is in part embodied in *Herland*'s
setting, which in *Herland* is more than mere background. As do the authors of
many utopian novels, Gilman uses the physical world to (quite literally)
prepare the ground for the social arguments to come, prefiguring those
arguments in natural description and even using the landforms themselves as
vehicles for argument. Gilman's is a particularly cartographical overview,
delivered as the three male protagonists view Herland from a biplane, hoping to
get “the lay of the land” before they descend (41). This vantage point allows
them to see in one glance the argument in the terrain, though they do not
recognize it as such. Gilman's own world construction is carefully controlled
to create the kind of "nature" that she is most interested in discussing,
anticipating the way Herlanders themselves will manipulate their physical
environment to achieve an ecological ideal.

The aspect of their ideal that is most obviously embodied in the physical space
of Herland is containment, enforced by severe natural boundaries. From above,
they see that the land is confined to a triangular “high-standing spur” rising
out of the “dark green sea of crowding forest” around it (41). The sense of
obstruction established by the imposing forest is reinforced on the far end by
“white-crowned peaks in the distance, themselves probably inaccessible.” The
bounds of Herland are clearly defined, and with them the scope of the systems
that define it. Their cultural and economic isolation is assumed, as is their
ecological sequestration. The natural disaster that locks the Herlanders into
a kind of natural terrarium also prevents organisms outside this "high-standing
spur" from interacting with life outside of Herland---it must, as it is an
apparently functional assumption the Herlanders use in their ecological
equations. To use a contemporary term, the same factors that keep Herland off
the map make it a distinct bioregion---a term that implies autonomy and closure
of both infrastructural and natural physical features.[^bioregionalism]

[^ln-bioregionalism]: point to some research on bioregions, also show that it
is probably another fantasy in real life but works conceptually/in fiction

Gilman's organization of distinct types of natural space within these
boundaries emphasizes her narrative shaping of space as well as the extent of
Herlanders' environmental management. Each type of region occurs where it will
be most useful to the human inhabitants of Herland, though it is unclear how
much of this is the result of intentional influence and how much would be
considered "natural." Describing Herland from the boundaries in, Vandyck says,
“It appeared to be well forested about the edges, but in the interior there
were wide plains, and everywhere parklike meadows and open places”; in
addition, “closely cultivated gardens” mark the interior plains (42, 47). He
notes the presence of cities without giving a sense of their number or spatial
orientation, but there are indications later that similar small cities are
spread throughout the country.[^ln-small-cities] These cities seem to be the
organizing principle of the space, but not in the same pattern of development
that would create the metropolis and suburb in the real world. As one might
expect given the trend of integrating the built and natural environments, there
is not one single, sprawling urban center to Herland, nor the corresponding
separation of urban and rural divisions of labor. Instead, there appear to be
small towns in a loosely unified political relationship. For this loose
associative structure to work as a nationalized unit in the apparent absence of
any transportation technology, natural barriers in the interior have to be kept
to a minimum. The relegation of the forest to the edges of Herland, then, is
important both symbolically and practically. It maintains the marginality that
is part of the forest's essential cultural or symbolic character---it is still
as far from urban space as one is able to go---but in this case the careful
management also prevents the trees from impeding travel through the interior.
This practical function is underscored by the presence of “clean, well-built
roads,” the unhindered view from “the edge of the open country” through field
glasses, and the speed with which three Herlanders on foot are able to distance
themselves from the male intruders (42, 47). Open space is carefully preserved
in service of the infrastructural, visual, and physical links that unite the
disparate groups of Herlanders who seem to be clustered in semiautonomous urban
spaces. 

[^ln-small-cities]: See, for example, the men's lecture circuit
partway through the novel (109-11). 

This deliberate organization of the land into forest, open space, and urban
space subtly introduces the "garden" paradigm of space, emphasizing
containment, management, and a teleological understanding of space---of a land
that is constructed for a purpose, in contrast to actual wilderness, which is
both a détante of dueling evolutionary imperatives and a web of
interdependence---but wild either way. Here, in contrast, natural spaces are
reifications of perspectives on nature itself, which occur in the way that
interaction with the land occurs, and in this case, in the way in which the
land is shaped physically and narratively. 

<!-- transition from control-limitation/world-construction subsection to
economy/ambient labor section-->

It is hard to maintain, however, any distinction of "perspectives on nature"
from perspectives on human economic and social systems in Herland. It would be
more accurate to say that these carefully shaped landscapes embody *Herland*'s
understanding of the web of mutual determination that always unites these
systems, but does so especially clearly here. Understanding this
interdependence causes Herlanders to transform their system of labor and
economics as well as their physical landscape, and this combination of
transformations allows them to survive the problems of a full world with scarce
resources. 

Thinking about Herland through an economic lens is the clearest way to
demonstrate this interdependence, precisely because it is so difficult: normal
economic categories fail to describe the system, and new ones are required. The
meaning of "labor" in a world without money is always going to be ambiguous,
but here the blending between economic, ecological, and social structures adds
an additional level of difficulty. The wholesale transition of Herland' natural
environment to an orderly progression of ecological zones appears to have
happened through a process that shares the characteristics of a natural ecological
progression (with humans included in the ecology, of course), a massive public
works project, and transformations in the social understanding of individuals
and communities. The way these elements come together is particularly clear
when the Herlander Ellador describes the process of becoming a forester:

> “It was a butterfly that made me a forester,” said Ellador. “I was about eleven
years old, and I found a big purple and green butterfly on a low flower. I
caught it, very carefully, by the closed wings, as I had been told to do, and
carried it to the nearest insect teacher---” (I [Vandyck] made a note there to
ask her what on earth an insect teacher was) “to ask her its name. She took it
from me with a little cry of delight. ‘Oh, you blessed child…. This is a female
of the obernut moth,’ she told me, ‘they are almost gone. We have been trying
to exterminate them for centuries. If you had not caught this one, it might
have laid eggs enough to raise worms enough to destroy thousands of our nut
trees---thousands of bushels of nuts,---and make years and years of trouble for
us.’…I grew a foot, it seemed to me, and determined then and there to be a
forester.” (123)

On the narrative level, this passage sets up, and then reverses, an expectation
of conservation, disclosing instead an ideology of environmental management
more typical of forestry.[^ln-forestry] The tender, careful handling of the
frail creature will ultimately culminate, we realize, in the its death, as well
as the last stage in a deliberate extinction of the entire species. This
reversal effectively replaces uncomplicated reverence for the "natural world"
with a commitment to transform the “natural” into the system that most benefits
humans (and also the fictional obernut tree, if only incidentally).
Understanding that the obernut moth limits the propagation of the obernut, and
realizing that the obernut is Herland’s “best food-nut,” they create
a situation in which nurturing the environment they have crafted will mean
nurturing themselves (123). 

Of course, this type of ecological management also contains some of the basic
problems of a Herland forestry more broadly conceived, problems that fall along
the same lines as the ethical and material complaints leveled at proponents of
the good Anthropocene. The Herlanders hardly seem to blink at the forced
extinction of a species for the benefit of the human Herlanders, even though
there will be no other obernut moth in the world as they know it---recalling
Crist's rebuttal to the Ecomoderns, "mass extinction does not have a technical
solution" (247). Furthermore, this action would violate the deep ecologist's
fundamental ethical axiom: that there is an inherent value in every living
thing, regardless of its value as a resource. It also presumes perfect
knowledge of what will happen when the obernut moth is exterminated,
a manageable equation in the novel but one that could have unpredictable
consequences in any real-world setting---in fact, considering this scenario as
though it were real, an overabundance of the obernut moth could well have been
an unintended result of another act of "control."[^ln-management-disaster] Part
of the fiction here is that perfect knowledge and absolute control over an
ecology are even possible.

More is at stake in this intervention than Herland's economy as we understand
it, however---where "economy" is understood as exchange and as profit. They are
intervening in an attempt to protect the highest-yield form of food, protecting
their own survival as a species, and thereby complicating the ethical matter
considerably. As is common in utopian novels since Thomas Moore, money is the
first thing to be eliminated in Gilman's imagined society, and with it goes any
thought of accumulation or excess. The object of labor is always a more stable
and comfortable means of survival within their regional ecology, rather than
the profit motive of industrial agriculture, which places the human outside of
any ecological considerations. The Herlanders are the managers of this ecology,
but with the recognition that they are also part of it; they are both variables
in the equation and the mathematicians who are solving it, the gardeners and
part of the garden.

[^ln-forestry]: Forestry from Leopold, Merchant

[^ln-management-disaster]: cite the thing about wolves in Yellowstone... This
is Teddy Roosevelt's whole idea of game management, namely you eliminate the
other apex predators so you can have all the critters for yourself. But this
has outrageous downstream consequences, like rivers rerouting, erosion, etc.

Even the social norms and structures in Herland result from the ecological
roles played by the Herlanders, individually and collectively. In this case,
the forester, Ellador, is telling the story of forming a professional
identity---the moment when she conceives of herself in terms of her role in the
economy. But the nature of the "work" is such that this moment is inseparable
from the realization of her place in the *ecology*, as a conscious limiting
factor of the obernut moth in this case, and probably of other species in the
future. Ellador becomes more of a directed ecological force than a laborer.
Considered in terms of labor, a “forester” such as Ellador would be a peculiar
entity: she is not quite an agricultural producer, and yet her actions
contribute to the sufficient supply of food. She is not exactly employed by the
state, as a forester in our world would be, and yet her function to the
community is clear. Her duties are framed in terms of maintaining the
environment, and yet in doing so she is also maintaining herself---both
materially, by providing food for herself and others, and psychologically, by
coming into her identity. In this ambiguous form of labor, the social,
economic, and ecological place of the individual come together in ways that
make them difficult to distinguish.[^ln-ambient-labor-preview]

[^ln-ambient-labor-preview]: This concept will be elaborated further in the
"Ambient Labor" section below.


Though not every Herlander is a forester, Ellador seems to be an example of
labor in general as it exists in Herland. Gilman creates a system in which the
thing produced is environment, not commodity; in which, as a result, production
and consumption disappear as discrete entities; and which culminates in the
gradual subsumption of labor into being. The result is what I will call
a system of *ambient labor*.

<!-- ambient labor section-->

Gilman develops her system of ambient labor in the absence of the wage labor,
replacing the money economy with a "garden economy," or controlled exchange of
energy and nutrients (in the form of labor and food) towards a definite
*telos*. I leave the term *ambient* intentionally ambiguous to denote the
labor's status as part of the environment---it is something in the background,
itself ambient---and its orientation towards the environment---towards that
which is ambient---in terms of production and consumption. Gilman does not
theorize Herland's form of labor directly, but the ambient labor system can be
inferred from what she does show us of the economy and the roles within it.
There seems to be no rigid allocation of tasks, for everyone in some sense is
working on the same thing---again, on Herland itself. Everyone finds their way
to a task according to their inclination, like Ellador does, and all of these
tasks are understood according to their influence on the material and social
ecology. The labor's own "ambience," then, is a product of its focus on
everything else that is ambient rather than a focused economic goal for
individual gain. When they work, they work *on* the land, and not just in the
locative sense: it is the object and product of their labor, both raw material
and product, rather than a mere uncounted resource in the production of
a commodity. Further, working on the land in this way is their means of working
on themselves as a society, making changes to the social and economic structure
by transforming their environment. As a whole, these subtle changes institute
a new paradigm for both sides of the economic equation. Instead of a market
cycle or the capitalist working day, a state of ambient production and
consumption governs the rhythms of Herland.[^ln-ambience-morton]

[^ln-ambience-morton]: really do need to talk about Timothy Morton here,
"Ecology without Nature".

<!-- this should be in a consumption sectioon?? The solution to the
ever-present problem of resource distribution is to by a Bellamy-like
nationalization of the economy with a very un-Bellamy-like casual
application.[^bellamy] There are no chits for a determined allocation of goods,
in other words, but merely an automatic provision by the environment itself.
Everything is like an apple on the branch, waiting to be plucked. -->

Evidence of ambient labor is to be found in the setting itself and the way in
which it is "cultivated"---it is never the single crop that is cultivated, but
the entire system.[^ln-producing-systems] The combination of ubiquity and
gentleness in this systemic intervention means there is no purely built or
purely natural environment, but only the liminal space between the produced and
the wild. Nowhere is this contrast of cultivated natural space with actual
wildness more evident than within the forest itself, where it is underscored by
the voiced amazement of the three male outsiders. In Vandyck’s initial
impressions, he points out with astonishment that “even the forests looked as
if they were cared for” (42). Later, Terry says, “I never saw a forest so
petted, even in Germany. Look, there’s not a dead bough---the vines are
trained---actually!...[The trees are f]ood-bearing, practically all of them....
The rest splendid hard-wood. Call this a forest? It's a truck farm!” (44). The
word “cultivated” is repeated many times with reference to every aspect of the
landscape, flora and fauna alike, as well as the tiny gardens that dot the open
plains---at one point the forests are referred to simply as “the cultivated
area” (66). The forested area is not the tangled thicket, wilderness embodied,
as it is in the world beyond. It is instead the breadbasket of the rest of the
country, or as Terry puts it, a "truck farm." This term, now slightly archaic,
indicates by definition produce grown for non-commercial purposes, via
definitions of “truck” as bartered (and thus non-market) goods (“truck,”
*OED*). But it is also not an exploitative model of agricultural development,
as is evident from the words used to describe the actual interventions on the
part of human Herlanders. The forests are not planted or culled but "petted,"
or indulged in their natural growth and proliferation; similarly, the vines are
"trained," a term of domestication but not exploitation. The agricultural
system encompasses the economic system, not the other way around.

<!-- worth checking in with Anthropocene stuff here? Could say 'this is
important cuz some people say the Anthropocene should begin with agriculture;
revising agricultural methods is therefore one way of asserting control over
anthropogenic transformation; maybe after ambient labor section-->

[^ln-producing-systems]: See Katherine Fusco, "Systems, Not Men: Producing
People in Charlotte Perkins Gilman’s *Herland*" for a similar argument about
the reproductive part of this process.

Of course, decentralizing economic gain disrupts the terms used to discuss
production. Any attempt to describe the industry of Herland leads one to ask:
What do the Herlanders actually produce?[^ln-shishin] The only tenable answer
is that they produce their environment, and solely their environment. This is
no system of industrialized agriculture, but more of a totalizing permaculture.
When Vandyck learns more about the cultivation that constitutes “foresting," he
discovers that the process entails less planting of produce than creation of
a desirable environment entire. In some cases this has led to “the deliberate
replanting of an entire forest area with different kinds of trees”---an
unimaginably vast displacement that nevertheless results in a functioning
ecosystem, and one that, with respect to the needs of the Herland people, has
been improved (104). Like Ward, Gilman exhibits a fixation on "improving" the
natural environment that is a remnant of Enlightenment thinking about nature.
But rather than replacing natural systems with human systems in the name of
"improvement," the Herlanders hope to improve both by integrating them,
creating ecological balance in a system that includes the built environment as
well as natural space. 

Unlike an "improvement" measured in economic output, hers is measured in
ecological effects. The way their built and natural environments relate can be
deduced by the absence, in Herland's development, of the most invasive
developments of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. The lack of
industrialization, for one, implies that their waste material will be of a kind
that can return to the cycles from which it came. Most of the byproducts of
their production can probably just be composted, as we can see from the
attention given to soil conditions. Gilman specifies that “an increasingly
valuable soil [is] built, instead of the progressive impoverishment so often
seen in the rest of the world” (105). The development of the environment is
allowed to proceed without direct human activity, but the conditions are set
such that this natural development adheres to a desirable course. The
environment that determines this growth (the soil) is altered so that
development is both bolstered and guided by the combination of Herland’s
natural and built environments. As a result, the only necessary human
intervention is too incidental to be understood as labor---as is the case for
Ellador, the forester discussed in the introduction. In the case of the
production of soil, the main place of intervention would be in byproducts of
consumption---compostable scraps and human excrement---which come with
necessary vital processes. Composting and waste management are defined by
systemic interventions that either leverage or strategically prevent the
natural activity of the ecosystem's organisms. Instead of understanding
production on the level of the product, they produce process; where the rapidly
industrializing society of 1915 America was defined by systems of production,
Gilman's alternative opts for the production of systems.[^ln-fusco]

[^ln-fusco]: For more on systems as a paradigm of production, personhood, and
society in *Herland*, and more specifically the relevance of Frederick Winslow
Taylor's *The Principles of Scientific Management*, @fusco_systems_2009.

[^ln-shishin]: Alex Shishin also asks this question, with a different but
related answer: “If such an industrial base exists in Herland, we do not see
it, nor hear or smell it. The same pleasant condition---a pronounced lack of
industrial pollution and ugliness---is present in the two seminal utopian
novels which preceded Herland: Edward Bellamy's *Looking Backward* (1888) and
William Morris's *News from Nowhere* (1890). But while Bellamy and Morris offer
explanations for this, Gilman does not” (“Gender and Industry in *Herland*"
101). 

What might be seen as an idealistic and utopian model is, in narrative context,
just the most rational response to extreme scarcity. The exclusive localism and
closed-system dynamics that seem most relevant to the twenty-first century are
forced on the Herlanders so suddenly that they are almost extinguished: there
was once free passage to the sea, but natural disasters close it off
conclusively and limit them only to what they can produce in their regional
ecology (81). In these conditions, the market system fails. The system of
cultivation through ambient labor that the Herlanders develop instead is
therefore a means of subsistence without resorting to a market-based
distribution of goods that they recognize will always outgrow its container.
Herland begins in conditions of extreme scarcity but attains, under the
guidance of a developing ambient labor, the conditions of post-scarcity.
Persisting in a full world requires the ecological economics of *usefulness*
that defines Herland forestry, but only the low-impact intervention of ambient
labor has allowed the Herlanders to flourish on a “little shut-in piece of land
where one would have thought an ordinary people would have been starved out
long ago or reduced to an annual struggle for life” (104). The non-market
interaction of cultivation and wildness has lifted the Herlanders out of simple
necessity, making plenty and freedom from scarcity a constitutive element of
the environment itself.[^ln-wilderness-scarcity]

[^ln-wilderness-scarcity]: Li-Wen Chang also notes this peculiar character of
the wilderness, saying that “nature and culture nurture each other” in the
Gilman’s environment. Through a reading of Leo Marx’s *The Machine in the
Garden* (1964), she argues that Herland constitutes a “‘middle landscape’…where
machine meets landscape, where the two opposing forces, technological and
pastoral, contact and compromise which each other” (343). In a similarly
technological reading, Katherine Fusco argues in “Systems, Not Men: Producing
People in Charlotte Perkins Gilman’s *Herland*” that “Gilman dissolves the
distinction between biological and mechanical reproduction through her
insistence that the proper way to understand a person is as both product and
part of a system” (427).


Production is only one half of the economic equation, however, and arguably not
the most pressing one in the context of the full world. The Herlanders'
relationship to their environment also changes the nature of consumption, which
becomes as unfocused and free from market logic as production. The way this
peculiar coexistence of the managed and the natural affects consumption
patterns is revealed during the men's attempt to escape captivity. On the run,
Vandyck experiences consumption in a post-money, post-scarcity environment,
saying, “Mighty lucky it was that we could live off the country as we did. Even
that margin of forest seemed rich in food-stuffs” (67). The land itself has
become a kind of pantry without ceasing to be an exterior space. Consumption in
Herland is rendered as an interaction with “the country,” but the possibility
of “liv[ing] off” it does not constitute an achievement as it might in
a survivalist wilderness adventure. Instead, the land provides. 

Consumption fades into the background as a result, in the world of the novel as
well as narratively. Plentiful access to resources leaves the act of
consumption largely un-narrated throughout. In other naturalist novels,
commodities and their consumption become indicators of one's place in the money
economy and, therefore, the capitalist social structure, resulting in litanies
of goods and prices. Lily Bart's main relationship to plant life is in striving
to keep "fresh flowers for luncheon...jonquils or lilies-of-the-valley," and
her family's inability to provide the "two dollars a dozen" to do so is used
early in the novel to mark their fall from financial grace [@wharton_house_1990
27]. Clyde of Dreiser's *An American Tragedy* muses "that if only he
had a better collar" he would enter the milieu of those more happy and
successful, that to be one of them meant "that you possessed all of these
luxuries" and "went how, where, and when you pleased" (13, 43). Except for the
passing reference to the "obernut" in Ellador's tale of professional
identification, Gilman does not describe the presumably unique products of this
foreign ecosystem, though we know eating occurs mostly in communal eating
houses, and the only time clothes come up is when the Herlanders supply them
with a "thicker variety of union suit" (55). The eliding, collective reference
to "food-stuffs" is paradigmatic of her references to food in general: it is
never more than a category, an acknowledge but unfetishized necessity. In
Herland one seems to *find* food without searching for it, eliminating in the
same stroke the array of choices that defines consumerism and the struggle to
attain sustenance that defines survivalism. This is the sense in which
consumption in *Herland* is "ambient." Vandyck's easy "liv[ing] off the
country" sets the tone for all references to consumption in *Herland*---the
depiction of plenty without waste, of the immediate satisfaction of wants by
goods that are always already at hand, recurs
throughout.

The ambient paradigm of production frees Herlanders from commodity production
and the exploitative traps inherent in commodity-based consumption. The way
this reduction of unnecessary labor comes about becomes especially clear when
framed by the labor theory of value---a theory that Gilman was not more than
passingly familiar with but was central to the socialism of other naturalist
authors, especially Jack London.[^ln-jack-london-socialism] In the labor theory
of value, the exchange value of a commodity is defined by the cost necessary to
reproduce the means of production---which includes the sustenance of the
laborers---plus the surplus value, which derives from the unpaid labor that
occurs after the laborers have done enough to provide for their physical
necessities.[^ln-8-9-capital] When the only thing produced is a communally held
environment, though, the workers' aggregate labor does nothing more than
reproduce the means of production: the self-perpetuating ecology, which
includes human laborers. That it is self-perpetuating means that the amount of
work needed for their sustenance is constantly diminishing, as they go from
setting up the ecology to making Ellador-like tweaks, which happen
incidentally. The goal of labor is always the reduction of further labor rather
than the increase of profitability. Past this point, the entire economy---which
here, in the absence of a market, consists only of the production of use
value[^ln-use-value]---is subsumed by the exchange of energy and material that
defines the Herland ecology. 

[^ln-8-9-capital]: See chapters eight and nine and the first section of chapter
ten of *Capital* volume one (133-151).

[^ln-use-value]: On use value and labor, see John Bellamy Foster: “Marx
[wrote] in his *Economic Manuscript of 1861-63* that ‘actual labour is the
appropriation of nature for the satisfaction of human needs….’ It followed that
the actual activity of labor was never independent of nature’s own
wealth-creating potential, ‘since material wealth, the world of use values,
exclusively consists of natural materials modified by labour’” (157). To the
extent that labor does exist in Herland, it appears to take this form
exclusively, except that the modification takes as its product ecological
systems rather than commodities.

[^ln-jack-london-socialism]: On Jack London's socialism and reading of Marx,
see [@raskin_jack_2005].

With both production and consumption becoming incorporated into part of the
larger environment, the processes enter a different sort of relationship with
each other than the one that characterizes, for example, supply and demand. The
relationship that results comes into particular focus in the context of
Gilman's other attempts to address this problem, albeit by different means.
Walter Benn Michaels, in his reading of “The Yellow Wallpaper,” describes
a system that is in many ways a market version of the Herland garden economy;
many of the problems he points out in "The Yellow Wallpaper" are resolved in
*Herland* by the removal of the market entirely. Michaels argues that in “The
Yellow Wallpaper,” published in 1892, the woman’s body becomes a site
“simultaneously of production and consumption…rewritten as the utopian body of
the market economy” in which “products not only exist to be consumed, but
coming into existence they already are consumed.” The simultaneous buying and
selling, producing and consuming of the self is conditional to *owning* that
self, making “exchange…the condition of [one’s] existence.” This “triumphant
omnipresence of market relations” is, for Michaels, the cause of the
character’s nervous breakdown: the narrator’s “marking” the yellow wallpaper
that is the object of her constant, compulsive meditation, and simultaneously
being “marked” by it in turn both indicates the logic of the market economy and
is the main feature of the narrator's madness (*The Gold Standard* 13). The
system depicted in *Herland* shares this simultaneity and omnipresence of
production and consumption---but it exists without market relations and,
consequently, without breakdown. Replacing economic exchange into ecological
exchange and replacing wage labor with ambient labor turns the conditions of
a collapse into the conditions of an ecotopian ideal. Without a market economy
in which the product is always “already consumed,” goods are always already
produced *and* consumed: consumption exists in complex interrelation with
production as part of the ecology. 

The reproduction of one's own labor through self-sustenance, as the means by
which this simultaneous production and consumption occurs, is sufficient
contribution to the Herland ecology---and as such, it is a Herlander’s only
economic obligation. Ecology is a mutuality of being, an involuntary
interrelation of organisms that requires of them only that they survive:
therefore, when ecology replaces market relations, living is the only “socially
necessary” labor. With *Herland*, Gilman uses the production of environment,
which occurs almost entirely as a concomitant of living, to envision an
assimilation of the vital processes into the ecology-driven economy; this frees
the vital processes from the reliance on an external economy that Michaels
describes, stabilizing it against disruption from without. Environmental
production provides Herlanders with freedom from market exploitation and makes
the welfare of the individual subject essential to the health of the system
that contains it.

<!-- term presents itself: a just distribution of biopower -->

Of course, saying that Gilman splits from economics entirely would not be
strictly true. Rather, she splits from any economics existing in 1915. From our
vantage point a century later, it would be more accurate to say that she has
imagined life in a world that implicitly anticipates ecological economics.
According to Joan Martinez-Alier, ecological economics 

> sees the economy not as a circuit or spiral of exchange value,
a merry-go-round of producers and consumers, but instead as an entropic flow of
energy and materials that runs through the economy. An economic history
...inspired by ecological economics would study, for example, the energy
systems of humanity. (173)

A "reproductive approach" to ecological economics "studies the social,
temporal, and spatial conditions under which the economy (which absorbs
resources and excretes residues) is encased within the evolving ecosystems"
(173). These descriptions of ecological economics would serve just as well as
blurbs for *Herland* from an ecological perspective. And yet, texts included in
surveys of ecological economics do not usually predate the 1970s, and are more
commonly from the 1980s and on (Shmelev 3-8). It required more hindsight,
generally speaking, to formulate an ecological economic system that could act
as 

> a response to the pressing environmental problems of the twentieth century
and the inability of neoclassical economic theory to solve them or provide
adequate explanations for the unprecedented decline in biodiversity, the
changing climate, increased generation of waste, all caused by the pursuit of
economic growth. (Shmelev 3)

Gilman should then be considered as an intellectual precursor to this economic
formulation of a response to the conditions that are now known as the
Anthropocene, and more generally result from the problems of a full
world.[^ln-martinez-alier-ee-precursors]

[^ln-martinez-alier-ee-precursors]: Most of the other precursors to ecological
economics were occupied with the question of how to unite the laws of
thermodynamics with economic and sociological laws. Martinez-Alier and John
Bellamy Foster cite Sergei Podolinsky as an early pioneer in this area, in part
because he was a correspondent of Marx and Engels. [@guha_varieties_1997 172,
@foster_marx's_2000]

<!-- end old ambient labor section -->

Blending labor and being is a cornerstone of Herland's ability to create
a truly steady-state system that can withstand the stress of geographic
enclosure---what I have identified as the "full-world" problem in miniature. It
is the opposite strategy of the Ecomoderns' "decoupling" economic prosperity
from environmental impact, which they do in part by intensifying exploitation
of human-inhabited areas. And yet, it takes the same ideology of ecological
control that Ecomodernism is based on. The difference is that Gilman abandons
the economistic logic of optimization and externality---getting the most out of
what you use and ignoring what you do not by making it external to your
system---along with the capitalist logic of exploitation. She implicitly
identifies market logic as incompatible with her steady-state system.


<!-- pick up here-->
### Coevolution and the Metabolic Rift 

What, then, is the place of the human in the environment in *Herland*---that of
the producer or the product? And how does this view of the garden come to bear
on the vision of evolution presented in *Herland* and elsewhere in Gilman’s
writing? In beginning to answer these questions---and in her occasionally
essayistic prose, she does so with an unusual directness---Gilman reveals her
complicated relationship to evolutionary theory and the environmental factors
that influence it. She replicates her own ambivalence with respect to some of
the major evolutionary arguments of the nineteenth century in an exchange
between Terry and the Herlander Zava: when Terry refers to August Weissmann’s
refutation[^ln-ramsbeck] of Jean-Baptiste Lamarck, saying that “acquired traits
are not transmittable,” Zava and Terry respond:

>“If that is so, then our improvement must be due either to mutation, or solely
to education,” she gravely pursued. “We certainly have improved. It may be that
all these higher qualities were latent in the original mother; that careful
education is bringing them out; and that our personal differences depend on
slight variations in prenatal condition.”

>“I think it is more in your accumulated culture,” Jeff suggested. “And in the
amazing psychic growth you have made.” (103)

At stake here are the comparative roles of genetics and culture to evolutionary
development. The first sentence can be seen as weighing Darwinism against
Lamarckism, but no clear conclusion is reached. Zava also presents another
possibility, however, a unique synthesis of biological and environmental
determinism in which everyone descended from the original mother---which to
Herlanders means the known world---contains dormant unrealized powers that only
careful nurture can bring out. In this possibility, prenatal *conditions*
rather than genetic makeup determine the distinctions between individuals. This
view places emphasis on communal self-improvement in tandem with the inherent
worth of the individual. Put another way, it simultaneously posits an essential
and predetermined character and a gradual development of that character, a
course limited by both genetic makeup and environment while being guaranteed by
neither. A final element is added to the discussion by Jeff’s suggestion, which
favors a “culture” and communal “psychic growth” that are, it later becomes
clear, instilled by the system of education.  This discussion reveals a complex
interrelation of three elements in Gilman’s version of evolution: genetic
inheritance, environmental influence, and education. Here and throughout the
novel, none of these elements becomes central enough to be seen as a
mechanistic determinant; the exploration of each must necessarily take place in
terms of its interaction with the others.<!-- all of this should be framed as
extremely dangerous; this part needs to become a "problems" section-->

[^ln-ramsbeck]: See Beth Sutton-Ramsbeck’s note on on the passage in *Herland
and Related Writings* (103 note 1).

Gilman’s take on the first element, the genetic side of guided evolution, is
the one that has been the most (and most polemically) discussed in Gilman
scholarship. As is evident in the idea of an “original mother” from whom the
Herlanders have inherited their “higher qualities,” this genetic concept of
evolution, when taken in the context of the garden’s managed development, leads
quickly to a problematic relationship to eugenics. These implications would be
hashed out by Gilman herself fifteen years after *Herland*, in an unpublished
(perhaps unpublishable) article called “Gardening and the Baser Passions.”
Though evidently an attempt to be humorous---or so it is described in a letter
from Charlotte Barbour, one of Gilman’s editors at Putnam, explaining that the
essay would not be accepted by horticulture journals (Barbour)---in such a grim
context the effect is anything but. In sharp contrast to a sentimental view of
the garden parodied early in the article, Gilman says that the main work of the
gardener is not to plow, plant, or harvest---rather, “his main business, his
longdrawn incessant effort, is to kill.” From this premise the rest of the
essay describes the many and various ways to kill as well as the necessity to
“kill without ceasing” if the gardener’s “plants are to live,” and finally
dissolving into a litany of the many organisms detrimental to the gardener’s
efforts. Although, as Cynthia J.  Davis points out, it would be incorrect to
suggest that none of the reprehensible and often racist views that defined her
conservative old age had developed when she was writing *Herland*, it seems
that not until “her later years” did “Gilman [become] a decided proponent of
eugenics” in the way she is if her essay on gardening is to be taken as
extending to the garden of her society (“His and Herland” 82). Indeed, a shift
in the way she considers the *literal* garden is documented in her
correspondence well after the time of *Herland*. In a letter to Alice Park on
June 29th, 1928, some two years before the rejection of the “Gardening” essay
and thirteen years after *Herland*, Gilman writes: 

> All May the planning and planting, all June the weed-weed-Weeding. I’ve changed
my mind about the word “fighting” as applied to weed. If the desire to kill and
desperate efforts thereto, against the ceaseless pressure of an en-enemy
[*sic*], a million-headed enemy which rises up like Anteus is not a fight, what
is it? (*Selected Letters* 272)

Her acceptance of the violent paradigm for the gardener in 1928 indicates that
her position prior to that point was a gentler (if willfully myopic) view of
managed growth---perhaps best defined by a metaphor of “planting” rather than
“weeding.” Though by no means a resolution to the novel’s eugenics problem (it
merely shifts to a different type of eugenics), this emphasis on traits that
are encouraged over those that are discouraged allows Gilman to avoid the overt
brutality that she would later embrace regarding literal gardening.
Accordingly, the role of the human as simultaneous producer and product of the
environment is more complicated as it appears in *Herland* than this later
depiction of the gardener's task. <!-- get rid of the apology-->

[^ln-eugenics-criticism]: The topic of eugenics, along with the question of
race in Gilman more generally, has been a major and controversial topic of
Gilman scholarship. The initiating essay in this strand of criticism is Susan
S. Lanser’s 1989 essay “Feminist Criticism, ‘The Yellow Wallpaper,’ and the
Politics of Color in America,” which Jennifer L. Fleissner says has since
become “hegemonic” (Fleissner 95). Cynthia J. Davis provides a rigorous
historical and biographical context to eugenics in *Herland* in her essay on
Gilman and Lester F. Ward, “His and Herland.” In a somewhat different vein,
Fleissner urges a re-historicization of the eugenic conversation in terms of
middle-class women, nineteenth-century feminism, and the rise of a “therapeutic
culture” as it relates to race in America (92-5).

The model of evolutionary guidance that Gilman emphasizes in her novel is
instead focused on the *environmental* management described above, the second
determinant in her tripartite system of evolution. The effects of this process
thus extend beyond the purely social change of the various domestic reform
movements and into the biological realm, and guidance of human development
occurs at one level of remove. Here the vision of an enriched soil becomes the
operative metaphor, above either “planting” or “weeding,” in that the
environment that encourages and guides growth is the only thing directly
interfered with---*not* the organism itself. This view of the environment’s
relationship to biological development comes largely from the influence of
Lester F. Ward, a contemporary of Gilman’s who was a botanist, paleontologist,
and sociologist, and whom she considered one of the most important thinkers of
her time. This approval was due in large part to of his gynaecocentric view of
evolution, which afforded a primacy to women very much in line with Gilman’s
own thinking. Cynthia J. Davis has conclusively demonstrated the influence of
Ward on Gilman’s writing in general and *Herland* in particular, even arguing
that the novel can be seen as a narrative extension Ward’s theories
and an extension of his gynaecocentric theory. Most important in terms of
Gilman’s relationship to environment is Ward’s Lamarckian view of evolution:
because Lamarck proposed the inheritance of acquired traits across generations,
environmental influence becomes central to that process to the extent that it
determines which traits an organism acquires.[^ln-lamarck-giraffe] As Davis points out,
Gilman goes even further than Ward (and Lamarck) with her emphasis on the role
of environment in human evolution: environment is Gilman’s “answer” to “why
women had not flourished,” Davis says, and the limits imposed by environmental
factors are “crucial to Gilman’s brand of determinism” (“His and Herland” 76).
It is in considering the relationship of biological and environmental
determinism that one major effect of parthenogenetic reproduction in *Herland*
becomes clear: it sets to one side biological differentiation by
reproductive selection, as if she is isolating the variable of environment to
better argue for its effect on evolutionary development. Purely biological
determinism is ruled out as an explanation for evolution except to the extent
that biological difference is itself determined by environment.<!--what's the
poit of all this? I think it has to be about the type of change that is
encouraged; talking about awareness of limits and environment means that an
evolutionary paradigm of development is possible without any reference to
eugenics-->

[^ln-lamarck-giraffe]: The famous example of the giraffe stretching its neck
for food is particularly illustrative of this point: according to Lamarck, the
giraffe’s neck is long because of generations of stretching to find the best
leaves (Lamarck 122).

<!-- this exposes the vision of coevolutionary progress--> The unique
relationship of human and environment that appears in *Herland* is brought into
focus by a contemporaneous article that Gilman published in *Circle Magazine*
in 1908, entitled “Modern Beatitudes---The Newness of the Earth.” Here she
suggests that the earth and the human species are both mere children, as yet
relatively undeveloped but constantly growing into balance with one another.
The evolution of the human race is framed here as a gradual accretion of
understanding as to the effects of human activity on the earth---or an
understanding of what has [since scaled up to become the
Anthropocene]---coupled with a mass-adaptation based on that understanding.
After describing the gradual exhaustion of the earth’s resources by “our
present methods,” Gilman reassures us that the process will not continue to its
catastrophic conclusion, for we 

> are waking up in good earnest these days; ceasing to be a baby race, a set of
ignorant, selfish, short-sighted infants, madly quarreling with one another
over the fruits most easily gathered. We are young yet, but no longer mere
children; young with the splendid hope and courage of youth, but not with the
weakness and irresponsibility of infancy.…All we have to do is to apply
ourselves to study the conditions of life on earth, and learn to meet them.

<!--this is explicitly Wardian; draw lines --> Humanity is saved, in this
account, by its inevitable development into a wiser, gentler race. Progress in
this vision is not social Darwinist Herbert Spencer’s steady march from
simplicity to complexity or the continued expansion of the race to the edges of
the earth. It is instead a renunciation of wastefulness and destructive
behavior, which is to be replaced by the more careful management of the natural
environment. <!-- emphasis on limits; she has more faith in reforestation
efforts, etc. --> “There is absolutely nothing prevent us,” she continues in
clear anticipation of *Herland*, “from reforesting our hills, checking our
floods, preserving our soils, maintaining the balance of nature plus the art
and skill and learning of mankind.” The paradigm of the human struggling
against the natural world is replaced by the simultaneous development of both
realms. By framing this development in terms of the growth of the human
species---and indeed, of the planetary system as a whole---she implies a vision
of *coevolution* defined by an increase in balance, not an opposition to be
resolved by conflict: refinement replaces dominance and expansion. Development
without growth has been the key to Herland's continued existence; [it predates
*Herland* in Gilman's thinking as a concept for the entire planet.]

<!-- need to decide: is this context or is it central to my understanding of
her? Could definitely put this in the larger prehistory of ecological
economics; see Foster and Burkett on Podolinski; but what is it giving me?
A coevolutionary paradigm, but I need to be making my way to action. Maybe that
action against the rift becomes action that transforms the human, in that we
are understanding the human as part of the larger system that is being
transformed-->This system of non-competitive coevolution is at the foundation
of Gilman’s garden society, but can be seen as part of a much larger
sociological and scientific trajectory beginning in the nineteenth century.
Though she was not influenced by Marx---she was vocal about her distaste for
Marx and Marxism, in large part because of the depiction of women and women's
labor in his work[^ln-gilman-marxism]---his concept of the “metabolism” between
humanity and nature nevertheless bears strong resemblance to the coevolutionary
paradigm in *Herland*. Marx’s social metabolism (*Stoffwechsel*) is at the
center of John Bellamy Foster’s book *Marx’s Ecology*, in which he demonstrates
the influence of a materialist conception of the natural world on Marx’s
thinking, and rebuts claims that Marx is an anti-ecological proponent of
industrial development at the expense of the natural world. The metabolism of
human and nature constitutes a set of “evolving material relations” in which
the human’s simultaneous dependence on and alteration of its environment
determine the circular, material exchange between them (Foster 11, 155-60).
Labor becomes, in Marx’s view, 

> a process between man and nature…by which man, through his own actions,
mediates, regulates and controls the metabolism between himself and
nature.…Through this movement [of the laboring body] he acts upon external
nature and changes it, and in this way he simultaneously changes his own
nature. (qtd. in Foster 157)

For labor to be an effective mediation of the system, though, it must be
“actual labor,” which produces only the material wealth of use-value (157). In
other words, it has to be a system like Herland’s that eschews the market
entirely. The material interchange that defines this concept derives in large
part from the rise of “energetics” in the physical sciences in the 1840s and
1850s, leading to a particular emphasis in Marx’s metabolic system on the
possible enrichment and degradation of soil found in the work of James Anderson
and Justus von Liebig (Foster 144-9, 161). Because the metabolism depends on
the energetics of soil, the separation of town and country causes a “rift” that
leads to the gradual despoliation of the environment (141-5). Unregulated
production and disharmony between the built and natural environments, two of
the concepts most heavily revised in Gilman’s system of coevolution, are the
factors that Marx identifies as disruptors of the metabolism. 

[^ln-gilman-marxism]: See for example Denise D. Knight’s biography of Gilman:
“With other socialists of her background and inclinations, Charlotte distrusted
Marx and preferred to rely on the intellectual labors of a native-born
intelligentsia that included herself.…For the most part, she sought her desired
economic transformations within the capitalist system even while criticizing
that system for its intrinsically patriarchal attitudes and practices” (197).
Gilman herself provides additional detail in her autobiography, *The Living of
Charlotte Perkins Gilman*, saying, “My socialism was of the early humanitarian
kind, based on the first exponents, French and English, with the American
enthusiasm of Bellamy. The narrow and rigid ‘economic determinism’ of Marx,
with its ‘class consciousness’ and ‘class struggle’ I never accepted, nor the
political methods pursued by Marxians” (131). Although Gilman’s own distaste
for Marxism has kept it out of much Gilman scholarship, the similarity of the
concept of the “metabolism” discussed below is extremely useful comparatively,
both in bringing out the specifics and implications of Gilman’s own ecology and
placing her in the larger intellectual context of her time (even the parts of
that context that she might not place herself in).

Considering this metabolic system in relation to *Herland*, we see the
relationship of Gilman’s evolutionary system to the garden environment and the
consequent system of labor, and specifically the way world-building and
community-building are related dialectically through labor.<!--simplify
sentence--> Environmental management, achieved through a reversion to the
“actual labor” that produces only use-value, is a means of guiding the complex
material interchange essential to the coevolution of the Herlanders and
Herland. In order to effect meaningful change on this front, the Herlanders
have to change their own practices and culture, which they do in part by
altering their material environment. 

But the determining factors in this relationship with environment are not
exclusively physical. The physical is mediated by the cultural, and the
cultural place of environment is, as one might suspect, just as rigorously and
systemically guided as the material ecology. Education forms the final piece
of Gilman's coevolutionary system and is the means by which it is developed and
maintain across generations, allowing individual social and cultural
adaptations to the environment to accrue over time.[^ln-simone] The Herlanders
model and reinforce the dialectic with environment through a ludic system of
education that is just as "ambient" as their system of labor. When asked about
Herland schools, the Herlander Somel says, “With the babies…we first provide an
environment which feeds the mind without tiring it…. But as early as
possible…we provide choices, simple choices, with very obvious causes and
consequences” (128). The system of education graduates from an accretion of
environmental understanding to the gradual realization that human action
affects that environment, just as Gilman describes in “Modern Beatitudes.” 

[^ln-simone]: For a broader view of gilman’s interest in education reform, see
Deborah M. De Simone’s “Charlotte Perkins Gilman and Educational Reform.”

<!-- why bother with games? What's the point here? Is it just more ambient
labor stuff?-->Moreover, the second stage of education is achieved through *games* that
“develop the faculties [they] wish to encourage.” Games are shown to be
foundations of pedagogy---and, thus, social determinants---in the incident near
the beginning of the novel in which the men’s escape attempt is interrupted by
an invitation to play. Three Herlanders set up a pile of stones with a yellow
nut on top, and invite the men to throw stones at the pile. They fail miserably
until “Jeff succeed[s] in bringing the whole structure to the ground. It took
me [Van] still longer, and Terry, to his intense annoyance, came third.”
Experience of the pedagogic built environment is followed by swift instruction
and the presentation of an alternative method:

> Then Celis set up the little tripod again, and looked back at us, knocking it
down, pointing at it, and shaking her short curls severely. “No,” [Celis] said.
“Bad---wrong!”…Then she set it up once more, put the fat nut on top, and
returned to the others; and there those aggravating girls sat and took turns
throwing little stones at that thing, while one stayed by as a setter-up; and
they just popped that nut off, two times out of three, without upsetting the
sticks. (69)

The contrast between the two performances is severalfold. The men’s idea of
victory, for which they are reprimanded, destroys the entire tower; the women
strike only what they mean to, with minimal disruption to the larger structure.
The men compete against each other and against the women, sulking when they
lose and becoming divided; the women cooperate for the most efficient group
performance, systematizing the resetting of the structure and taking turns, and
their performance is described not according to the relative success of the
members but according to their aggregate success rate. The difference between
the two types of competition is the difference between boxing and a boat race:
success of the individual in the men’s group leads to the failure of the rest
of the group, while the success of a single Herlander contributes to communal
benefit. In both the relationship to the external and the interrelationship of
the internal, the competitive tendencies of the men---which destroy the
external elements of the system and waste time and energy---are contrasted with
the precise and cooperative systems of the women, which culminate in a system
of cyclical and effortless play. This basic structure describes the Herland
school system, which becomes at the higher levels a system of ecological
instruction. (Recall the “forester” passage discussed in the introduction:
Ellador’s interactions with insects are guided by a “bug teacher,” and this
guidance leads her to forestry.) Education in Herland discourages tendencies
like competition, which disrupt the managed ecology of the garden, while it
reinforces the gardener’s mentality of cyclical action and cooperative
development. Social evolution brings the development of society into line with
the development of the environment, managing the material interchange of human
and nature.<!--repetitive unless I can find a purpose...-->

Coevolution is the foundation of Gilman’s garden---a “vegetable garden mind
you!, not merely flowers”: it allows identity of sustenance with the sustained,
simultaneity of the built and the natural, and cyclical reproduction in tandem
with evolutionary progress. The three elements of Gilman’s evolutionary
paradigm (genetics, environment, and education) work in a mutually reinforcing
system. Education instills the values of an environmental management in which
the self is included, guiding the creation and maintenance of an environment
that Gilman believes is the determinant of genetic variation and physical
transmutation. The principles of the sustaining garden finally bring social and
physical evolution into harmony. 

The question remains of how to approach a system of evolution that is marred
from one side by ethical problems and from the other by retrospective
scientific inaccuracy. To begin on an ethical (and negative) level, this
tripartite system does not enable us to dismiss the problematics of race and
eugenics in *Herland*, but they may complicate the understanding of the system
in the same way that understanding Gilman’s reliance on Lester F. Ward does;
recognizing such connections allows us to better place Gilman in an
historicizing context, even if it does not (and should not) allow us to hold
her system up as an exact roadmap. <!--yeah this doesn't matter; talk more
about ethics and the due process problem-->

This speculative evolutionary system does come into useful focus, however, when
we consider it in terms of the utopian function of the novel. If we
provisionally take utopian fiction as a speculative fulfillment of problems
deriving from the author's historical present---a process sympathetic to
Frederic Jameson’s concept of aesthetic resolutions to real problems, though
perhaps not identical with it[^ln-jameson]---the usefulness of Gilman’s
evolutionary narrative becomes more conceivable. The next section will bring
the issues of labor and evolution discussed above to bear on *Herland*’s
ecotopian function, asking how its utopian response to the common tropes of
American literary naturalism can bring it into greater contact with the
concerns of the Environmental Humanities. <!--connect with good anthro
instead-->

[^ln-jameson]: See “On Interpretation” in Jameson’s *The Political
Unconscious*.<!--should include quote, who knows what this means-->

### Utopian Naturalism and the Environmental Humanities

[Need to incorporate more of the old conclusion (at the end of this draft) to
better incorporate some intro regarding how to reconcile this with the literary
critical reception]

That may well cover much of what can be taken from *Herland* in a purely
environmental sense; but the novel also occupies a unique space in literary
historical terms, in a disputed space between realism and naturalism. This
literary context exists in codependence with the environmental paradigms Gilman
establishes with her garden economy. As such, the utopian version of naturalism
that her work constitutes has unique implications on the larger impact of her
work in an evironmentalist sense.

An influential recent reading of Herland as a naturalist novel has come in
Jennifer Fleissner's *Women, Compulsion, Modernity*. Fleissner takes up the
garden theme in slightly different terms than those employed here, arguing that
x,y, and z. As compelling as this re-categorization of *Herland* certainly is,
its focus in some ways leaves out the materialist implications to which Gilman
applies some fundamental naturalist premises of mean her utopian schema. Among
the few tenets of American literary naturalism agreed upon in the criticism (a
house somewhat divided to say the least) are a handful of premises recognizable
in *Herland*'s major threads of argument: a; b; and c [source from below and
footnote sources]. In Gilman's treatment, all of these come together in a
single, broad conception of environmental determinism. As I have shown, a
belief in environmental determinism is the basis of the systems in Gilman's
novel, each of which rests on the logical anteriority of external conditions to
individual and communal nature. Broadly, Gilman is arguing by example that by
changing those external conditions, the course of society and the species can
be somehow governed.

Where this differs from orthodox literary naturalism (if such a thing exists)
is in its unabashed belief in the power of human influence over these
conditions. In other naturalist novels, that determinism is very much a one-way
street. In *The House of Mirth*, *The Pit*, and *The Financier*, widespread
capitalist excess induces the paradigmatic "plot of decline" in the individual
characters through gambling and speculation, which in the eyes of these
novelists amount to the same thing. Elsewhere, malignant social influences lead
to the moral disintegration of the naturalist protagonist, but somehow that
protagonist never gets a word in edgewise. The conditions that, to the
naturalist, *create people* are not open to revision; they only revise.
Suggesting that it can be otherwise is the basis of Gilman's utopianism---and,
some might say, the naivete the epithet implies. 

But then, the difference between what I am calling "utopian naturalism" and
traditional naturalism may merely be a matter greater optimism with respect to
collective action. What ultimately prevents deliberate influence over external
conditions in the other naturalist novels I brought up above is *failed*
collective action, which hangs over many specimens of the genre like a spectre.
In *The Octopus*, stilted collective movements take on the status almost of an
obsession for Norris: time and again he creates moments in which things might
change forever, the masses might be stirred into world-historical action, if
only the right word is said in the right manner---and time and again, that
moment is missed or is deliberately thwarted.[^norris-collective-examples] In
*Sister Carrie*, too, wage riots that might conceivably have revised the plight
of someone like Hurstwood silently crumble in the background of the main plot,
mere set-pieces laden with the possibility of an alternate
history.[^dreiser-collective-examples] In *Herland*, successful collective
action is assumed, but it is collective action in the absence of the
overwhelming force of a total system of capitalism. Only the women remain after
the disasters that sequester Herland from the rest of the world, and those
women respond to necessity apparently with one mind and with one possible
solution to the scarcity problem. What is utopian about the novel, then, is
perhaps not the promise of what collective action could achieve, but the ease
of achieving it in the first place and its totality once
realized.[^bellamy-collective-action] 

Precisely that ease and totality should be a source of pause for anyone
evaluating *Herland* as a case study, for a double ominous silence pervades the
novel in its failure to address questions: Where is the state? and Where is the
room for dissensus? The voices of those Herlanders not permitted to reproduce
(or forced to reproduce) by the will of the majority should remind us of
everything that is subtly horrifying in the novel, and serve as a reminder that
it is to be approached with some caution and skepticism. The whole task of
guiding human development puts an enormous weight on the question of how such
decisions are made equitably, and it is precisely this issue to which Gilman
devotes the least attention.

Nevertheless, Gilman's utopian naturalism---with all the mutual determination
of the individual with social, economic, and ecological systems that it
implies---is what makes her version of the garden society distinct from other
images of the "garden" more familiar to the American literary canon. Its
material-cultural continuum that posits environmental praxis as a fundamental
aspect of political praxis. Indeed, in the utopian naturalist system,
environmental praxis is logically anterior to any meaningful political change,
because it understands environment as an absolute determinant of political and
cultural structures, even if that determination is mutual. 

*Herland*'s understanding that human and natural systems are inseparable leads
her to the structures I have exposed here, and the resulting system both
predicts what we now call social ecology and repurposes the determinism assumed
by American literary naturalism. Where Gilman exceeds Leo Marx's other
examples, then, is in its insistence on communal, material praxis as a means of
transcending natural and economic limitations. But it also differs from other
gardens in its understanding of the human as just one more element that makes
up the garden system. 

### Conclusion: Transition Narratives and the Steady-State System (?)

When it is viewed as an environmentalist text, more can be taken from *Herland*
than a snapshot of a once-progressive system of thought. The novel can be
considered as part of a literary canon of transition from a status quo based on
growth, capitalism, and ecological destruction to a future based on
steady-state development and a truly ecological society. *Herland* can be
considered a narrative of transition because of its obvious resonances with
localism and the sustainable forestry its conditions of scarcity require. But
in addition, Herland's own foundational myth is one of transition from a
civilization embedded in a larger ecosystem and political network to one that
is materially independent.[^ln-herlands-transition] In this context, the
miracle of parthenogenesis becomes a larger symbol of autochthony and
self-regeneration in terms that go well beyond the human.

[^ln-herlands-transition]: Find the passages about Herland's foundation myth.

"Transition" is a term that has gained global prominence in the past decades
with the rise of the "transition network," a loose organization of communities
committed to becoming less dependent on global flows of energy in general and
fossil fuel economies in particular.[^ln-rob-hopkins] The role of aesthetics
and narrative in this process of transition has so far been focused on our
relationships to energy systems: in *Living Oil* (2014), for example, Stephanie
LeMenager reads "physical infrastructure against artistic forms" to "explore
how social affects might be shifted toward a different-looking and -feeling
post-petroleum future" (68). She discusses the movement primarily in terms of
its relevance to "peak oilers," anti-oil activists who use narratives of
transition to imagine not just the end of oil, but what is on the other side of
it---imagined infrastructures and energy systems along with replacements for
the affective connections with aspects of our culture that LeMenager argues are
inseparable from our energy infrastructure (66-8).[^lemenager-transitions] A
literary canon of transition cannot stop with energy systems, though. More
fundamental contradictions exist between human systems and the ecologies that
contain them, and literatures of economic and cultural transition will also
demand to be read.

[^ln-rob-hopkins]: a few notes on rob hopkins, transition network, some sources

A vision like Gilman's, however utopian, could be very instructive indeed in
the context of this emergent literature of transition to a post-fossil-fuel
economy and the recent eruption into the mainstream of "cli-fi."[^clifi] Of
course, *Herland* is far from perfect and even further from a roadmap. Even if
we ignore the magical premise, we have to content with the Malthusian
population control, "refinement" through eugenics, and the impossibility of
dissensus. That is to say that we see some of the same grave challenges that
have plagued other precursors to and early forms of environmentalism. But
pursuing a literary canon of transition will mean taking literature as a
staging ground for those challenges, not as a magic mirror that only shows a
perfect world---even when a utopian novel may think it is providing just that.
*Herland* can be a fulcrum for putting pressure on an ideology of localism
that, as Paul Gilroy complained in reference to Raymond Williams, is not
sufficiently separated from racist nationalisms. In working through *Herland*,
we have to ask how to disentangle the material necessity of localism from the
cultural necessity of cultural inclusiveness.

Reading a novel as a novel of transition also implies a certain *method* of
reading with elements of surface reading rooted in a context of materialism.
Like LeMenager's task of reading "physical infrastructure against artistic
forms," I propose to take seriously the spatial organization and material
interventions in the ecology and infrastructure that are elaborated in the
interstices of *Herland*'s loose narrative. These details can reveal both the
conceptual place of Gilman's particular ecotopian imagination in American
environmental thought and the moments where she exceeds or adds to that
thinking.

<br>

In this expanded environmental of Gilman’s utopian novel, we can see her
speculative society as a garden-based model of transition. She represents a
submerged counternarrative of the garden image in American literature: one that
has less to do with the Edenic, expansionist visions of her contemporaries than
with the more sophisticated and politically astute gardens of the past fifty
years. As a figure of American literature, she offers a way of opposing the
simplistic determinism and social Darwinism so often attributed to naturalist
fiction, all the while marshaling an altered version of these concepts to
delineate a non-exploitative system of labor that resists, even counteracts,
the despoliation of the environment. To write with some reference to literary
naturalism, a genre uniquely concerned with reflecting reality, is for Gilman a
way of addressing the reality that actually is---just as the utopian function
of her brand of naturalism is a way of creating the reality that should be.
Additionally, the concept of the garden puts Gilman in context as an early if
unorthodox figure in American environmentalism on top of her stable if
controversial position in the history of American feminism. Certainly all
accounts of her work have had to grapple with such multiple axes of
consideration: the socialist, the feminist, the environmentalist, the utopian
thinker. Just as the plants in a well-planned garden, the conversations that
inhere in *Herland* exist in complex interrelation, each offsetting and
nurturing the others, together forming a multifarious and complicated whole.

###Note: This is the old conclusion; parts of it will become footnotes and/or incorporated into an introduction to the "Utopian naturalism" section.

The literary context and thematic content of *Herland* invite a reading of it
in terms of American literary naturalism, and indeed Gilman features as an
occasional figure in (especially contemporary) criticism on naturalism. The
difficulty of considering the novel in these terms, however, comes from the
notoriously vexed term “naturalism” itself. The only obvious consensus in
contemporary criticism of the movement is a rejection of a straw-man
descriptions of it in which individual agency is seen as always subjugated to
an uncomplicated determinism. Beyond this, any foray into naturalism seems to
come with either a radical reworking of the category or, as in the case of
Walter Benn Michaels in *The Gold Standard and the Logic of Literary
Naturalism*, an explicit desire to “avoid that debate entirely” (26). But the
stable threads that emerge as topics of conversation (if not arguments within
those topics) are distinct enough to admit the category as evidence and
consider the ways that Gilman is wading into these intellectual and artistic
streams. The most commented-upon of these topics is the relationship of
individual agency to deterministic forces, which the most compelling
discussions take as occasions in which naturalist novelists complicate the
rendering of the agentive self, not as the means by which that self is reduced
or made irrelevant. Lee Clark Mitchell in *Determined Fictions*, for example,
includes in his naturalist canon works that depict the conflict between the
character’s own self-conception as an “autonomous, integrated, freely willing
agent” and the countervailing narrative strategies that prove that conception
to be false; agency becomes largely psychological, while determinism becomes a
narrative, rather than an ontological, premise (xv). Donald Pizer is perhaps
the most optimistic voice on the topic of determinism, seeing in the resistance
to “amoral” deterministic forces a revitalization of “man’s sense of his own
dignity and importance” (11). Jennifer L. Fleissner’s *Women, Compulsion,
Modernity* resolves this tension in part with the concept of *compulsion*, in
which individual agency and “rationalizing ‘forces’ appear as more deeply
intertwined,” nature becomes an important actor in social life, and compulsive
ordering rituals arise as a mediation between the free and determined versions
of the self (9-10). In addition to the determination question, the relevance of
natural law and scientific knowledge to social, political, and economic life is
paramount to most definitions of naturalism, with Mark Seltzer notably arguing
in *Bodies and Machines* that the naturalist novel unites industrial production
with biological reproduction, and that it also responds to the realist premise
of linear narrative continuity by “map[ping] in high relief…the evolutionary
dynamics” of that continuity (43). A third trend of scholarship on naturalism
is to point out the archetypal plot of a character’s “degeneration” into a
figure truly determined by base desires, a trope associated especially with
Frank Norris’s *Vandover the Brute*.^[See for example Seltzer, 36-7.] Each of
these three topics is evident as a theme in *Herland*: a combination of
environmental, biological, and social determinism undergirds her depiction of
coevolutionary praxis; the blending of nature and culture has been discussed at
length above; and the possibility of degeneration into a “brute” dominated by
masculine urges is implicit in the immediate imprisonment of the male intruders
and the defensive stance assumed by the Herlanders.

It is primarily by building on Jennifer Fleissner’s reading of *Herland* in
*Women, Compulsion, Modernity*, however, that my own discussion can come to
bear on the question of literary naturalism. Fleissner’s 2004 intervention into
the study of naturalism has been acknowledged by many reviewers as a major
shift in the terms of the critical conversation, with Hildegard Hoeller,
reviewing the book for *American Literature*, calling it “an altogether new
view of naturalist writing” that leaves our view of the movement “usefully
expanded” (188). By shifting the focus of naturalism to the changing role of
women in the 1890s and the early 20th century, Fleissner reveals the repetitive
motion of compulsion that undergirds, as Rita Felski puts it, “women’s
problematic relationship to historical time” (282). Considering some of the
garden-like aspects of *Herland* in relation to the garden that surrounds the
house of “The Yellow Wallpaper,” which she calls as a “liminal space, neither
home nor wilderness” that “solves the problem of the too-natural ‘outside’ and
the too-cultural ‘inside,’” Fleissner argues that *Herland* should be seen as
“a ‘realist’ response on Gilman’s part to the troubling ‘naturalist’ vision of
the attempt at order manifested in her own earlier story” (95). In this
reading, the obsessional need to order that is so crippling (because its
realization is impossible) in “The Yellow Wallpaper” becomes the foundation of
Gilman’s imagined community, and compulsive domesticity drives “the utopian
social vision that would render the earlier story an obsolete relic” (87-95).
In the context of her larger argument, *Herland* is a feminist alternative to
the literary “West Cure”^[A pun on the “rest cure,” which Gilman was herself
prescribed and which figures in “The Yellow Wallpaper.”] that she takes as a
defining feature of masculine naturalism; in “The Great Indoors” of this
feminine West Cure, domesticity is supposed to perform for women the
therapeutic rehabilitation that young men were alleged to get from “going West”
and contending with the elements, freeing themselves from the teacups and
Victorian parlors of realist fiction (75-98). 

The extent to which domesticity can be taken as a “realist” fix for the
“naturalist” problems of “The Yellow Wallpaper” relies on these definitions of
naturalism and realism.^[For another take on Gilman’s response to naturalism in
her essays from *The Forerunner*, see Christopher P. Wilson’s “Charlotte
Perkins Gilman's Steady Burghers: The Terrain of Herland.”] But the garden of
*Herland* as I have described it here can be seen as an attempt to resolve more
aspects of naturalism^[Such attempts to “resolve” other literary paradigms are
not unprecedented in Gilman’s body of work and its criticism. See Jennifer S.
Tuttle’s “Gilman’s *The Crux* and Owen Wister’s *The Virginian*:
Intertextuality and ‘Woman’s Manifest Destiny’” for another reading of Gilman
responding to masculinist literary production.] than the problems that arise
from the domesticity embodied in the imprisoning leisure garden of “The Yellow
Wallpaper”---though resolving these is certainly much of *Herland*’s project.
Norris 

The complex interrelation of economy, ecology, domesticity, and evolutionary
theory presents a wider rejoinder, not only to the gated garden of Gilman’s own
earlier “naturalism,” but also to the “rank” and “tangled” vegetation of the
wilderness that stands in for a naturalist view of nature defined by
“Darwinist” competition, non-productivity, and despair. The first things that
Vandyck and the other intruders learn, the condition of their understanding the
Herland garden, is the anti-competitive lesson of the stone-throwing game; the
expansive view of cooperative growth among humans and other organisms, which
defines the economy and ecology of Gilman’s garden, reforms the men who
represent something very external to the circuit between *Herland* and “The
Yellow Wallpaper,” something that extends the argument about domesticity beyond
its initial scope. Widening the focus of Gilman’s response beyond the domestic
in this way requires an addition to the description of *Herland* as “realist”
in Fleissner’s sense. In accepting many of the topics common to the naturalist
novel and revising them with a vision of what happens under certain conditions
of cooperation, Gilman invents a kind of utopian naturalism.^[The term “utopian
naturalism” also allows us to consider *Herland* as a response to naturalism
without losing the rich contextualization of the novel within the utopian
generic tradition. Gilman herself has been very explicit about her interest
especially in Bellamy’s *Looking Backward*, and considering the work in generic
terms is a useful means of approaching the novel. It contextualizes, for
example, the satirical take on the present simultaneous with a programmatic
projection of the future, a feature Frederic Jameson (reading Ernst Bloch)
identifies with Thomas More’s *Utopia* in “Morus: The Generic Window”. The
definitive work on Gilman’s relationship to the idea of utopia and its
corresponding literature is Carol Farley Kessler’s *Charlotte Perkins Gilman:
Her Progress Toward Utopia with Selected Writings*.] This utopian naturalism
accepts many of the premises associated with naturalist writing---some measure
of determinism, the relevance of natural law and scientific theory to social
life, and the need to guard against degeneration---while resolving by way of
the utopian premise those aspects of it to which she objects and which have
given naturalism its reputation for pessimism. These resolutions occur
primarily through the shift in focus from the individual will to the will of
the collective---a shift that is both a hallmark much utopian fiction and a
constitutive feature of the garden ideology. 

[^lemenager-transitions]: List some of LeMenager's sources and elaborate.

[^forestry]: Gloss on forestry; from Radical Ecology?

[^clifi]: Define clifi, show that it's an actual term

[^bioregionalism]: bioregionalism defs from Merchant? Or elsewhere, and some
history

[^bellamy]: note on what bellamy's system looks like and the influence on
Gilman, with sources of that influence

[^feminist-revival]: need some details on the whole revival in
the 80s

[^feminst-reception]: details on feminist reception and dismissal

[^environmental-social-economic-justice]: overview of recent links between
environmental humanities and social/economic justice

[^prior-art]: previous environmental readings

[^norris-collective-examples]: examples from the octopus of "the moment" when
things might ultimately have been different

[^dreiser-collective-action]: citations for collective action in sister carrie

[^bellamy-collective-action]: can compare to Bellamy here, the bloodless
transition

[^li-wen-chang]: summarize the part of chang's argument dealing with the middle
landscape

### Appendix 

<!--

### Reproduction, Refinement, Expansion


Understanding Herland as a precursor to ecological economics, or even reading
for its ecological implications, might seem to go against the grain of the bulk of Gilman
scholarship, but it by no means contradicts it. The subjects more common to
Herland criticism---domestic reform, gynaecocentric evolutionary theory, and
reproduction as labor---all work hand in hand with her environmental program.
In this light, ambient labor and environmental stewardship can be seen as an
eruption of ecological consciousness into an already rich body of work, spurred
by her own long history as a gardener and her encounters with Ward's ecological
sociology.

Reproduction, for example, sheds its normal
associations in *Herland* and becomes yet another ecological-economic process.
As she does more directly elsewhere in nonfiction writings like *Women and
Economics* (1898), in *Herland* Gilman defines motherhood as an economically
valuable contribution to the collective. It is also, as is crucial in her
system, depersonalized, and is therefore subject to division of labor just like
every other economic activity.[^ln-systems-prior] When a division of economic
labor is expanded to include ecology, taking into account, what an ecological
economist might call ecological services and ecological labor, incorporating
human reproduction into the economic division of labor also subsumes it into
the managed regional ecology. In this context, the magical, parthenogenetic
reproductive capacity (*Herland*'s speculative conceit) is explicable less as
a product of divine intervention than as an extension of the garden
economy. Reproduction in the desired
proportions takes on the same inevitability and automatism of production,
becoming a feature of carefully (and communally) controlled conditions rather
than a sum of uncoordinated individual choice. 

[^ln-systems-prior]: This aspect of the novel has been much discussed in Gilman
scholarship, as has the understanding of motherhood as an ecological and
systemic process. See Alex Shishin’s “Gender and Industry in Herland,”
Katherine Fusco’s “Systems, Not Men: Producing People in *Herland*,” and K.
Graehme Hall’s “Mothers and Children: ‘Rising with the Restless Tide’ in
*Herland*.”

[^ln-reproduction-contradiction]: a little bit from Merchant here... ---and
thereby seems to offer a resolution to Merchant's "second contradiction"
between production and reproduction some seventy years before Merchant
identified it

Gilman extends the mutual determination of nature and culture to its logical
conclusion by exploring a process of literal and cultural *coevolution*, not
between two discreet species of organism (as commonly occurs in the non-human
natural world), but between the human and its environment entire. The
evolutionary system that Gilman accepts is an idiosyncratic one. In line with
the rest of the slippage between organism and environment in the novel, she
assumes a semi-Lamarckian stance of species development that emphasizes the
role of environment in physical evolution. Like Lamarck, she considers the
possibility that acquired traits can be passed on to other generations, which
gives environmental determinants an outsized influence on the development of
a species. Taking environment as a significant determining factor in evolution
also brings the creation of culture into the evolutionary equation: Gilman uses
education, a fundamental part of the Herland culture, as a way to guide the
management of the physical environment, depicting a society that, in
determining its environment’s development, simultaneously guides its *own*
development. The resultant coevolutionary system foregrounds the interaction of
the human with the natural world in its conception of a continued human
evolution. By depicting this process as a result of social reform and control
of the built environment, Gilman frames her work as well as that of her
contemporary feminist reformers as interventions in the evolutionary process.
She goes further still in illustrating the dialectical evolutionary paradigm
that enables the existence of *Herland* in what should be conditions of extreme
scarcity. 

Simply put, Gilman has developed a garden system that is able to operate in
conditions of extreme spatial and ecological limitation by rejecting the
concomitance of growth and development and refusing the separation of human and
non-human systems, whether those systems are flows of energy, ecological
systems, or even evolutionary ones. [In the following sections, the specifics of
how she incorporates human labor into an ecology (both socially and materially)
will be expanded upon significantly. But to discuss a vision of near-total
environmental determinism like this one, discussing social structures requires
a discussion of the speculative world itself---and in this case, how the
construction of that world constitutes a type of argumentation.]




### Domestic versus Ambient Labor

To produce only environment and to live instead of work: these concepts in many
ways sound like the kind of domesticity that Gilman abhorred and spent
much of her career attempting to reform. The terms of her ecological economy
even borrow from and contribute to the terms of domesticity at the turn of the
twentieth century. But it is not in acquiescence to domesticity that she
engages it: rather, it is precisely this reappropriation of housework
into the sphere of the economy that defines Gilman’s rejoinder to existing
domesticity. To be understood, Gilman’s economic paradigm of
environmental production has finally to be considered alongside her lifelong
pursuit of domestic reform. 

Throughout Gilman’s career, she sharply criticized the relegation of women to
the domestic sphere and the exploitation inherent in domestic
labor;[^ln-gilman-on-domestic-labor] among the most programmatic of the results
was her part in the campaign for the kitchenless household. In *Women and
Economics*, she argues that “change in the economic position of woman from
dependence to independence must bring with it a rearrangement of these home
interests and industries” (224). Thus, she lays out a vision of
“apartments…without kitchens” except those “belonging to the house from which
meals could be served to the families in their rooms or in a common
dining-room,” hoping thereby to liberate the “hundreds of thousands of women in
New York City alone who are wage-earners, and who also have families”
(242-3).[^ln-domestic-labor-refs] In a strikingly similar passage in *Herland*,
Van says, “For food we either went to any convenient eating-house, ordered a
meal brought in, or took it with us to the woods, always and equally good”
(144). The relevance of this domestic reform advocacy to the utopian vision of
Herland is unsurprising, but what *Herland* adds to the conversation is a
consideration of these communal spaces as part of the larger, self-sustaining
system. The communal kitchens are what nourish and revitalize the soil that in
turn produces the material that those kitchens and their dependents need to
survive. The stated goal of Gilman’s domestic reform---of incorporating
domestic labor into the sphere of the economy by opening it to division of
labor[^ln-division-labor-refs]---becomes in *Herland* an
incorporation of domestic labor into ecological management. In this ecological
garden economy, environmental production *is* that economized version of
domesticity.

[^ln-gilman-on-domestic-labor]: See especially *Women and Economics*, *The
Home: Its Work and Influence*, and “The Waste of Private Housekeeping.” For the
wider context of domestic reform in Gilman’s work and in the context of the
early twentieth century, see Yvonne Gaudelieus’s “Kitchenless Houses and Homes:
Charlotte Perkins Gilman and the Reform of Architectural Space,” Polly Wynn
Allen’s *Building Domestic Liberty*, and Dolores Hayden’s “Two Utopian
Feministsand Their Campaigns for Kitchenless Houses.”

[^ln-domestic-labor-refs]: See also Allen’s *Building Domestic Liberty*: “By
the middle of the nineteenth century, roughly one-third of American women
entered the paid labor force on a temporary basis, usually until they married.
Only the poorest women---immigrants, widows, and free blacks---engaged in a
lifelong effort to make ends meet financially by working outside of their
homes” (12).

[^ln-division-labor-refs]: See Chang, especially 323-4; and Fusco 420-1.

Indeed, since the closed ecological system that defines Herland eliminates the
distinction between interior and exterior space, the garden model of society
delineates a vision of a productive home, the spatial equivalent of
living-as-labor. The complicated lines of home and world are born out by a
conversation between Terry, the mouthpiece of domestic imprisonment, and Jeff,
the character who eventually becomes a male Herlander and appears to speak the
Herland party line: 

> “*Home!*” [Terry] sneered. “There isn’t a home in the whole pitiful place.”

> “There isn’t anything else, and you know it,” Jeff retorted hotly. (121)

In Jeff’s explanation, “home” means so much that it has, to Terry, effectively
become meaningless. Home is defined in contradistinction to economic labor by
the masculinist Terry, and the conversation can be taken as Gilman’s narrative
staging of the housework-as-labor question. If foresting is both the base of
the Herland economy and part of making dinner, can it be called housework? If
the kitchen and pantry circumscribe the world, is everything housework? The
rhetorical question that Gilman repeatedly included in lectures to women’s
clubs becomes paramount: “Shall the home be our world? or the world our home?”
(qtd. in Allen 18). The means of eliminating this distinction in *Herland*, in
the context of what has been shown above, is its inclusion in a system larger
than itself. The imprisonment implicit in the first of Gilman’s options---“the
home be[ing] our world”---is based on the exclusion of that space from the
systems beyond it. But taking the “world [as] our home” implies the application
of a domestic paradigm of labor to a larger system.[^ln-expanding-domestic] The
blending of interior and exterior space also requires the interrelation of the
systems that define both. The exterior struggle of *nomia* and *logia*, of
mastery and the non-participation implied in study, is resolved by a paradigm
of productive domesticity only if the walls of the home are allowed to
encompass the world, thereby bringing that world under the sway of its laws.
Put another way, *Herland*’s garden system can be seen as a way of making
economy, ecology, and domesticity resolve each other.

[^ln-expanding-domestic]: It is in this sense, as Jennifer Fleissner argues,
that the expanded home of *Herland* offers a kind of solution to the
“naturalist” domesticity-as-degeneration of “The Yellow Wallpaper,” and the
garden of *Herland* fixes the image of the gated garden of the earlier short
story’s setting (Fleissner 87, 95). The impossible labor of ordering that leads
to the “Wallpaper” narrator’s breakdown, she points out, becomes an effective
ordering of the *Herland* garden. This shift to effectiveness can be seen, I am
suggesting, as a product of domestic labor’s inclusion in the at once
ecological and economic system.
-->
