
## Gilman panel proposal

Building on Charlotte Perkins Gilman's well known connection to Lester Ward and
her use of the "garden" as a paradigm for anthropogenic environmental change,
this paper will seek to identify Charlotte Perkins Gilman as a literary
contributor to the intellectual history of the Anthropocene. As Cynthia J.
Davis has shown, Gilman's *Herland* can be seen as a utopian, fictional
extrapolation of Ward's theories on women and evolution (73). But it is also
likely that *Herland*'s clear ecological consciousness is influenced by his
study of ecology, which was in turn influenced by the work of George Perkins
Marsh---a naturalist regarded as an early theorist of the Anthropocene in all
but name (Lowenthal 56). Serving as the Chief Paleontologist of the U.S.
Geological Survey while he wrote his influential *Dynamic Sociology*, Ward was
mentored by a disciple of Marsh's work, with whom he regularly exchanged ideas
on topics in philosophy and ecology alike (Ross 51-2). Gilman, meanwhile, was
not just an avid reader of Ward's work, but a longtime friend and correspondent
with Ward himself (Davis 73-4). The chain of influence will require further
research to characterize fully, but it is clear that all parties (excluding
Marsh) were engaged in an active exchange of ideas and, at times, were
collaborators. 

After demonstrating Gilman's relevance to the foundations of Anthropocene
thinking, this paper will examine some of the ways in which *Herland* merges
human and natural system. Herland's utopian social structure is based on what
I will call "ambient labor" and in the communal resource management Herlanders
are taught from birth. Instead of jobs and agriculture, Herlanders have roles
in the larger system, which they are constantly altering through some form of
political consensus. The environment, rather than being coerced or exploited,
is shaped from the soil up in such a way that it merely *provides*
autonomously. Any "production" in this system is primarily the production of
"environment" itself, and through this system Gilman renders the economic
activity of Herland as part of a larger ecological exchange of energy and
matter. This idiosyncratic version of the human-nature relationship falls in
between the relationships envisioned by Marsh and Ward, respectively. Through
the male interlopers who serve as the novel's protagonists, Gilman acknowledges
an ecological present defined by Marsh's version of anthropogenic environmental
change, which he sees as always destructive. But in Herland itself, she
imagines the conditions necessary to enable Ward's vision of the human as the
apex of evolution and as an agent to replace natural selection---that is,
anthropogenic change as primarily benign and part of a larger social evolution.
Gilman's place in the context of ecological thought can be defined by the
tension between these two poles---a tension that is historically rooted while
still being germane to contemporary thinking on the Anthropocene.


## Beginning chapter draft

[ "kill kill kill" essay ]

This essay was written [ x ] years after *Herland*, and it was never
published---her publisher said it [ ]. Nevertheless, it contains many of the
tensions that 


## outline-ish

1. intro

    a. set up Gilman/Ward as acknowledging the Anthropocene while attempting to
assert it as the rightful order---if only best practices are followed; buttress
with Blackwell

    b. this is undeniably Anthropocenic---the context of Marsh, Ward's history
with him; historically she finds herself definitely situated in the beginnings
of Anthropocene thinking, or more specifically, in one of the first
anthropocentric counterpoints to the tenets of the Anthropocene as synonymous
with apocalypse (Marsh on the end of the planet, here; context on Ward)

    c. Gilman embodies, "re-presenting" Ward (Davis), the principles of the
"good" Anthropocene, which has gained momentum as the official announcement of
the epoch grows closer. 

        i. mvmt essentially tries to figure out sustainable principles/more
invasive guidance of natural processes to make inevitable human influence of
ecosystems in which they are embedded something other than apocalyptic

        ii. we can see in Ward the roots of this movement (humanity as apex and
inheritor of evolutionary process)

        iii. in both cases such a benign guiding hand requires robust social
programs and a strong communal will to guide human influence of non-human
nature

    d. But Gilman's novella also embodies an ethical problem that is more
rarely mooted in Anthropocene discourse. She positions the human as
simultaneously the steward and of an ecosystem and a cornerstone component of
it; the changes that the human enacts (wilfully and otherwise) on the system as
a whole also alter the human. Environmental ethics become part and parcel of
human ethics, and vice versa. Artificial selection is taken to what would now
be understood as its *reductio ad absurdum*, resulting in a program of
voluntary eugenics. She demonstrates, in essence, the entanglement of two
fundamental problems: extending human ethics to non-human parts of the
ecosystem and considering the human ecologically (with all the wilful checks
and balances that implies). 

    e. We should therefore understand *Herland* as a meditation on the
embeddedness of human and natural systems, even if we have to resist its
utopian outcomes. By incorporating these disparate systems into one larger one,
she demonstrates the inseparability of politics and human ecology. Though often
naively at best---and monstrously at worst---she makes economics and ecology,
production and reproduction, and politics and planting completely coextensive.
While revealing the sustainable and environmentally progressive potential of
collective movements, she also exposes the extent to which such movements would
have to risk curtailing due process and democratic principles to achieve their
goals. Finally, she shows the potential for ecological optimism in literary
naturalism---a genre often derisively called "pessimistic realism" (Lukacs). In
thinking through these problematics (not to say resolving them), she creates
what we might refer to as a "utopian naturalism": a mobilization of the genre's
penchant for systems thinking to project speculative futures, futures that
ultimately rely on a faith in collective action. 



## other


At various points throughout her life, Charlotte Perkins Gilman lived in
experimental collectivist communities. When she was a teenager, to take an
early example, she went with her recently divorced mother to participate in a
cooperative housekeeping movement in Providence, Rhode Island. Though not
impressed---she left after a dispute with the psychic who led the cooperative
after a dispute over thoughts Gilman may or may not have had---it seems that
the experience set a precedent for Gilman’s own reformist ambitions (Davis
*Charlotte* 31-2).  Later she would life in communal households devoted to
social reform at a time when such design projects were seen as possible sites
of social change, though she apparently never stayed for long. Nevertheless,
the  From the first, environmental factors were related in Gilman’s life to
issues of labor and social reform; though a theme in much of her work, this
relationship does not ultimately come to fruition until the publication of
*Herland*.


The understanding of the society as itself a kind of garden surmounts and
contains all these, however, and taking this image as a conceptual frame for
the rest of the utopian vision re-contextualizes its defining features. Though
smaller iterations of the garden like those described above present subtly
different permutations of the its function in society, the framing garden is
consistently represented as an entity that is closed to the outside,
ecologically managed in order to preclude destructive competition, and defined
by an aesthetic that privileges functionality above all else. Recognizing the
garden as a frame reveals, on a socio-biological level, a view of
anti-competitive social Darwinism in which collective control of the
environment determines the development of the species. On the cultural and
economic level, it reveals a ludic revision of the work-ethic that keeps the
society at full employment while simultaneously eliminating labor as a discrete
activity. Finally, on the literary and critical level, the garden reveals a
polemical rejoinder to masculine naturalist writing that depicts environment as
a site of competition, competition as an empowerment of the individual, and the
individual as the driving force of society. That these diverse premises are all
presented in the same terms underscores the extent to which Gilman’s utopia is
predicated on the harmonious interleaving of the built and natural environments
that the garden represents.


[Marx's environmental definition of labor is a clear extension of Hegel's
account of self-consciousness, in which the bondsman comes to
self-consciousness in part through work on an external object. It is somewhat
ambiguous, however, how Hegel's highly individualistic development of self-
consciousness applies when, one, the agent doing the work is understood as a
community rather than an individual, and two, the "object" of construction is
understood as more than a blank canvas or mirror---when the nature of the
"object" of labor has just as much of an effect on the laborer as the reverse.
Hegel's bondsman comes to self-consciousness despite being subject to a
dominating lord by working on some external thing. The self-reflecting nature
of this work "passes into the form of the object," giving the laborer a
permanent, externalized artifact of that laborer's existence as an individual
(Hegel pars.  195-6). Marx gives a much greater import to the specificity of
this labor and its products than Hegel affords---the place of this type of
labor in his larger system seems to imply that at least the conditions of
production has a powerful determining effect on the laborer. But what both
leave out is the extent to which conscious choice over the effect and object of
labor can also be a form of self-construction. Self-consciousness in this sense
implies a static self at the moment of recognition that one comes to
consciousness of; but when the act of labor effects environment, and
environment determines the nature of the person, coming to consciousness
through work on the environment becomes a simultaneous awareness and
determination of the consciousness in question. That Gilman's understanding of
this process only comes into play on the scale of the community also demands a
reckoning with communal self-consciousness as a byproduct of communal
construction of self-through-environment. Her ambient labor, then, in
combination with the evolution of the community can form the basis of an
alternative paradigm to Hegel's highly individualistic model of
self-consciousness through work, in which communal self-consciousness is
developed through collective environmental construction. And the interaction of
culture and its material (ecological) base is therefore complex and
dialectical: by changing the land they change themselves, but they change the
land by changing how they relate to it.]

it is tempting to call Gilman's treatment of the Herland environment just one
more example of Leo Marx's "middle landscape," as some scholars have implicitly
done.[^li-wen-chang] It is certainly apt to describe Gilman's system in the
terms *The Machine in the Garden* delineates---were it better known by the
early '60s, *Herland* may well have been included. His "middle landscape" is a
space that is not entirely natural and not entirely cultural, but transcends
both while being somewhere between them; he creates a conceptual space for
thinking of a human development in more complicated relation to the natural
world, in which management and semi-utilitarian alteration does not strictly
have to be form of mastery. His rigorous intellectual history of the garden
shows that the vision of a land that simply provides in an Edenic (and
therefore garden-like) fashion has governed the American literary response to
nature from its earliest examples.  Gilman-like dreams of a natural world in
which "nature does virtually all of the work" and human and nature live in
"serene partnership" even show up in Roman examples of the pastoral (Leo Marx
23). The wish itself, then, is far from new, and neither is the despoliation
that inspires it.it is tempting to call Gilman's treatment of the Herland
environment just one more example of Leo Marx's "middle landscape," as some
scholars have implicitly done.[^li-wen-chang] It is certainly apt to describe
Gilman's system in the terms *The Machine in the Garden* delineates---were it
better known by the early '60s, *Herland* may well have been included. His
"middle landscape" is a space that is not entirely natural and not entirely
cultural, but transcends both while being somewhere between them; he creates a
conceptual space for thinking of a human development in more complicated
relation to the natural world, in which management and semi-utilitarian
alteration does not strictly have to be form of mastery. His rigorous
intellectual history of the garden shows that the vision of a land that simply
provides in an Edenic (and therefore garden-like) fashion has governed the
American literary response to nature from its earliest examples.  Gilman-like
dreams of a natural world in which "nature does virtually all of the work" and
human and nature live in "serene partnership" even show up in Roman examples of
the pastoral (Leo Marx 23). The wish itself, then, is far from new, and neither
is the despoliation that inspires it.
