---
---

[ something from the archives? ]

*Herland* is often read primarily for its "gynaecocentric" (?) evolutionary
theory and its vision of a society populated only of women---and understandably
so; this is the explicit centerpiece of the novel. No less central, but much
less discussed, are the novel's insights into the role of the human activity in
shaping natural systems. The Herland environment is marked by benign but
absolute human control over the natural environment. While there is very little
agriculture or cultivation in the traditional sense, Herlanders have chosen to
retain and support certain elements of the ecosystem while systematically
reducing or removing others, resulting in a food-production system that is more
reminiscent of permaculture than any of the prevailing horticultural models of
the time. [ details from existing intro. ] Herland is a woman-made Eden, but it
is also what Leo Marx calls a "middle place" ... [etc, cite Chen; this might
seem to put Herland in the long line of middle-places Marx and other
ecocritical accounts cite ]

What makes Herland especially relevant to Anthropocene studies in particular is
the fact that this anthropocentric ecological management arises out of a
catastrophic geological event, population pressures, and the limits of a
suddenly full world. Herland is situated on [ an enormous plateau, isolated by
sheer cliffs and inaccessible to the rest of the world (use quote if possible)
]. As one of the Herlanders explains, it was once more accessible and therefore
able to participate in economic and ecological exchange, but war and an
earthquake sealed it off completely two thousand years before the narration
begins [Herland x]. 

In its sudden transition to a closed system, Herland evokes the world that was
beginning to become visible from Gilman's vantage in 1915, when consciousness
of the globe as a trading paradigm was arising in tandem with consciousness of
the planet as an ultimate limit to resource exploitation and growth. Among
naturalists, Norris and Dreiser were especially attuned to the global
consciousness of trade, beginning to narrate the open movement of capital
internationally in *The Pit* and *The Financier*, respectively. The more
general consciousness of this state of affairs, in which capital flowed freely
across borders from about 1870 until it began to be regulated around the time
of the First World War, is evident in the French Chamber of Deputies decision
to outlaw any imports of capital [@streeter_globalization_2010 94-5]. <!--
details come from from histories of globalization... streeter et al.
Globalization and Autonomy; others; see if it would make sense to include
Wenzel Planet Vs. Globe here, need at least footnote for the distinction-->

Of the other consciousness, the *planet* as a final limit, Gilman's isolated
spur of rock is the chief literary representative in this period, drawing from
a reservoir of ecological thinking that would eventually give rise to an
institutionalized conservation movement. Among her most cherished
correspondents and friends was Lester Ward, who, though best known as the
founder of modern sociology, was also a geologist and paleobotanist, at one
time serving as the Chief Paleontologist of the U.S. Geological Survey
[@burnham_lester_1956 2, @ross_man_1975 51]. Ward is on one hand a contributor
to American conservationism, particularly in his work with Major John Wesley
Powell: Ward's mentor and the director of the U.S. Geological Survey, Powell
was an influential early voice of conservation, laying the groundwork for the
Reclamation Act of 1902 and training the scientists who would carry the call
for responsible resource use into the twentieth century [@ross_man_1975 51, 53,
57, 59; see also @stegner_beyond_1992]. But on the other hand, Ward articulates
a vision of the human's place in nature that seems contrary to the spirit of
limitation that has motivated the modern Anthropocene movement. In Ward's view,
the human is both the end-product of evolution and the agent that takes over
where evolution leaves off---both part of nature and the end of it. This
complicated dual role justifies the "laying open of her [nature's] bowels" for
experimentation, an explicitly Baconian perspective that understands the human
as the rightful "master" of non-human organisms and processes
[@ward_dynamic_1926 11-2]. The Wardian view of nature promotes absolute mastery
without exploitation---Prometheanism in the name of stewardship.[^prometheanism]

[^prometheanism]: explain prometheanism; use robinson article.

The same perspective can be attributed to Gilman. Ward had a great influence on
Gilman's thinking in the composition of *Herland*, as Cynthia J. Davis has
shown [@davis_his_2003]. But for Gilman, "influence" is more visible and
determinative than it might be for other authors. In *The Man-Made World, or
Our Androcentric Culture*, Gilman articulates a vision of engaged fiction that
would forward the ideas of other works, "teach[ing] not by preaching but by
truly re-presenting" [qtd. in @davis_his_2003 73]. This is an effective summary
of her approach in *Herland*. While the sociological and evolutionary elements
of this influence have been discussed by Davis and others, Ward's ecological
thinking had no less of a role in forming Gilman's novel. She does not
reproduce Ward's thinking exactly, however. Rather, her fictional extrapolation
of his theories in *Herland* dramatizes a tension between absolute limits of and
absolute control over the planet and its processes. 

This tension between limitation and control has hardly been resolved in the
century since *Herland* first appeared in Gilman's self-published monthly
journal, *The Forerunner*. To read *Herland* ecocritically now, in the dawn not
of the Anthropocene but of our consciousness of it, is to recognize this
enclosed garden civilization as a fictional laboratory for the scientific,
sociological, and ethical issues that define thinking about the Anthropocene.
More specifically, her and Ward's ambivalence regarding the status of the human
in nature---to put it somewhat reductively, as destroyer or savior---prefigures
a contemporary controversy over the possibility of a "good Anthropocene." 


## outline-ish

1. intro

    a. set up Gilman/Ward as acknowledging the Anthropocene while attempting to
assert it as the rightful order---if only best practices are followed; buttress
with Blackwell

    b. this is undeniably Anthropocenic---the context of Marsh, Ward's history
with him; historically she finds herself definitely situated in the beginnings
of Anthropocene thinking, or more specifically, in one of the first
anthropocentric counterpoints to the tenets of the Anthropocene as synonymous
with apocalypse (Marsh on the end of the planet, here; context on Ward)

    c. Gilman embodies, "re-presenting" Ward (Davis), the principles of the
"good" Anthropocene, which has gained momentum as the official announcement of
the epoch grows closer. 

        i. mvmt essentially tries to figure out sustainable principles/more
invasive guidance of natural processes to make inevitable human influence of
ecosystems in which they are embedded something other than apocalyptic

        ii. we can see in Ward the roots of this movement (humanity as apex and
inheritor of evolutionary process)

        iii. in both cases such a benign guiding hand requires robust social
programs and a strong communal will to guide human influence of non-human
nature

    d. But Gilman's novella also embodies an ethical problem that is more
rarely mooted in Anthropocene discourse. She positions the human as
simultaneously the steward and of an ecosystem and a cornerstone component of
it; the changes that the human enacts (wilfully and otherwise) on the system as
a whole also alter the human. Environmental ethics become part and parcel of
human ethics, and vice versa. Artificial selection is taken to what would now
be understood as its *reductio ad absurdum*, resulting in a program of
voluntary eugenics. She demonstrates, in essence, the entanglement of two
fundamental problems: extending human ethics to non-human parts of the
ecosystem and considering the human ecologically (with all the wilful checks
and balances that implies). 

    e. We should therefore understand *Herland* as a meditation on the
embeddedness of human and natural systems, even if we have to resist its
utopian outcomes. By incorporating these disparate systems into one larger one,
she demonstrates the inseparability of politics and human ecology. Though often
naively at best---and monstrously at worst---she makes economics and ecology,
production and reproduction, and politics and planting completely coextensive.
While revealing the sustainable and environmentally progressive potential of
collective movements, she also exposes the extent to which such movements would
have to risk curtailing due process and democratic principles to achieve their
goals. Finally, she shows the potential for ecological optimism in literary
naturalism---a genre often derisively called "pessimistic realism" (Lukacs). In
thinking through these problematics (not to say resolving them), she creates
what we might refer to as a "utopian naturalism": a mobilization of the genre's
penchant for systems thinking to project speculative futures, futures that
ultimately rely on a faith in collective action. 



New Questions
=============

Can there be a "good" Anthropocene?
------------------------------------

Elena M. Bennett

Is it possible to position Ward (and Marsh? Those like him?) as the originators
<!-- probably too far--> of the "Good Anthropocene" concept---and Gilman by extension? At least certainly the "good Anthropocene" wing of the naturalist argument.

### The Argument for Gilman as a good-Anthropocenist



Ward/Marsh
==========

- human takes over as evolutionary agent (apex, then agent)

- (climax ecology? prolly not)

- (carrying capacity? mebbe; more likely niches/geological niches) < yes

- proto-conservation and forestry


"The exchange of ideas among these four men began with Marsh;
Marsh's work was a catalyst for Powell, and Powell was the seminal leader
for Ward and McGee. The influence of Powell and Ward on each other
is unclear. Ward did a study of the prairie grasses in the arid region for
Powell in 1875 and, since both started writing in 1869, they probably
influenced each other's opinions. Ward was Powell's favorite on the
Survey, and Powell gave Ward a position so he could finish his Dynamic
Sociology. Ward was the sole member of the Survey capable of engaging
in a philosophical discussion with Powell, and he undoubtedly helped to
persuade Powell to accept positive government as an agent in resource
management. 11 McGee worked closely with Powell and helped him de-
velop the policies of the Survey. Powell encouraged McGee in geological
hydrological and ethnological research and McGee advanced to produce
works in hydrology and geology that surpassed the work of Powell. Ward
and Powell formulated a social theory based on Darwinism and oriented
for positive democratic action, but it was McGee who applied the eco-
logical insight of the group to the main conservation efforts of the day and
brought them together in a legislative program that reflected the natural
relationships between resources." (Ross 52)


# scraps 


There is none of the contradiction between production and
reproduction that has marked the twentieth century [Merchant ???], because
production has been totally subsumed by reproduction for all the organisms in
the ecological system, from the smallest organisms to the humans. 


